This issue's front section features a special Review: The Dynamic
Brain: From Spiking Neurons to Neural Masses and Cortical Fields. I
was asked to write this Editorial on behalf of the editors and
coauthors of the article, as an introduction— an introduction that we
hope will serve as an aperitif for the article itself. The Review was
solicited by Rolf Kötter (http://www.hirnforschung.net/bcw), which we
cofounded many years ago. These are highly interactive, discussion-
orientated meetings that focus on the latest advances in modelling
functional integration and coupling in the brain. They naturally
attract a broad range of computational neuroscientists,
neurophysiologists, neuroanatomists, and cognitive scientists. That
year, we seemed drawn to computational neurobiology and the models of
neuronal dynamics that were being used to understand interactions in
the brain.After a couple of days, it became clear that we were all
using exactly the same rhetoric in reference to completely different
things. Terms such as mean-field approximations, mass-action, neural-
mass models, neural-field models, density-dynamics, etc., were used
with exuberance but did not really help us to communicate. As a
result, Rolf challenged us to define and synthesise these perspectives
in a coherent and pragmatic way; the response to that challenge is the
article in this issue of The basic issue our synthesis tries to
address is how different models, used to simulate and predict observed
brain dynamics, can be traced back to their common fundaments. We then
try to illustrate the diversity of applications that can be
entertained with these models. The basis of these models rests on
modelling, not on the behaviour of individual nerve cells or neurons,
but on the probability density over ensembles or populations of
similar neurons. The Fokker-Planck formalism becomes central here and
can be harnessed using neuronal models that are cast in terms of
differential equations, with or without discrete behaviours (e.g.,
neuronal spiking or firing). From the density dynamics afforded by the
Fokker-Planck equation, we then pursue various simplifications and
special cases. An important example is when the density becomes a
point-mass over the expected states of a population. These are
referred to as neural-mass models and predominate in the computational
neuroscience literature. A key generalisation of these neural-mass
models is to neural-field models, where the location of the mass or
expected state of a population becomes a function of both time and
position on the brain's cortical surface or subcortical structures.
These models generate all sorts of interesting and neuronally
plausible patterns and self-organising phenomena, which can be
inferred through invasive or non-invasive electrophysiological
recordings of real brains.The applications of these models are
essentially twofold; some authors use them to understand the basic
principles of neuronal dynamics and implicit computations; for
example, understanding dynamics in terms of nonlinear mechanisms such
as bifurcations, understanding perceptual categorisation in terms of
multistability, or identifying the domains of parameter–space that
support commonly observed spatiotemporal patterns of activity. Other
authors use these models as forward or generative models, whose
parameters can be optimised to reproduce an observed dataset. This is
known as model inversion and allows one to estimate important
biophysical constants and parameters from empirical data. In this
context, one can also explore model spaces and use data to adjudicate
among various neural-mass or field models. We have chosen a few key
examples that highlight the necessary role of density-dynamics and
mean-field approximations in computational neuroscience.Participating
in this Review has been an enormously enlightening experience; at the
same time it was exhausting and something I will think twice about
before engaging in again. This is not meant to be a brief orientation
to the field but more an attempt to provide a reference framework for
people to understand their own contributions, in relation to others.
It is a Review that I look forward to giving to my students; although
I suspect they will take more than a weekend to digest it.