1Having read the articles comprising this special issue, I was struck
by how coherent they were and how they provide a compelling narrative
about how the brain responds to its sensory impressions, the
implications for subsequent action and the genesis of (and failures
of) a sense of agency. This review tries to summarise this narrative,
in theoretical terms, using the main points made by the individual
articles.2A common theme that runs throughout this special issue is
the notion of the brain as a constructive or predictive organ that
actively generates predictions of its sensory inputs using an internal
or generative model. This is now a widely accepted view of perception
that can be traced back to Helmholtz's original writings on
unconscious inference (Helmholtz, 1866/1962). In this review, I want
to emphasize that exactly the same principles can also explain action
and behaviour; and indeed theory of mind and a sense of agency. This
may be less apparent for some; in the sense that predictive coding and
other formal theories that fit within the inference framework are not
generally considered in the context of action and its agency. However,
perception and action can be related formally, through a common
minimization of prediction error (Friston et al., 2011).This is
trivially true, in the sense that under predictive coding, perception
is the job of optimising predictions to minimize sensory prediction
error, while movement invariably suppresses proprioceptive (e.g.,
stretch receptor) prediction errors at the level of the spinal cord
and cranial nuclei. This is nothing more than equipping a predictive
coding scheme with classical motor reflex arcs. At a more theoretical
level, one can use ergodic arguments about the nature of self
organising systems to reach exactly the same endpoint; namely, an
imperative to minimize prediction errors or surprise through action.
In this view, perception can be regarded as providing veridical
predictions about both exteroceptive (e.g., visual) and proprioceptive
(e.g., kinaesthetic) sensations that enable action or motor behaviour
to sample sensory inputs selectively to ensure predictions come true.
This is an important observation because it speaks to a substantial
proportion of the articles in this special issue that deal not just
with the auditory or visual consequences of a stimulus but their
behavioural and, implicitly, proprioceptive consequences. At a more
abstract level, predictions about how we will physically move are
composed and generated in a way that determines how we behave. Perhaps
the most important determinants of our behaviour (and their underlying
predictions) are beliefs about the intentions and behaviour of others.
This necessarily requires an internal model of self in relation to
others and an implicit sense of agency. The intimate relationship
between veridical and adaptive predictions, subsequent action and a
sense of agency is illustrated very nicely by the succession of themes
covered in this special issue. In what follows, we will consider
hierarchical perceptual inference in the auditory and visual domains,
active inference in terms of behaviour and responses, how this
pertains to a sense of agency and, finally, failures of inference in
psychopathology.3It is evident that there is a consensus about the
nature of predictions and their relationship to generative models in
the Helmholtzian tradition. This is articulated very nicely by the two
papers co-authored by the special issue's guest editors. For example,
Bendixen et al. (Bendixen et al., 2012-this issue) start from the
psychological perspective of mental models which “simulate our
reality”. They highlight the connections with the “theory of
unconscious inference of Herman von Helmholtz” and how these ideas
have been progressed to accommodate “the proactive or predictive
aspect of mental models” in perception. Their emphasis is on a “truly
predictive account of auditory processing (as opposed to a
retrospective verification of predictions)”. The mediator of this
predictive optimisation is clearly prediction error; namely “signals
of violated predictions (mismatch signals such as a mismatch
negativity and stimulus omission responses)”. The same theme is taken
up by Winkler and Czigler (2012-this issue), who provide a concise and
compelling summary:Free energy is a quantity from information theory
that quantifies the amount of prediction error or, more formally, it
is a variational approximation to the surprise or negative log
likelihood of some data given an internal model of those data
(Friston, 2010). A particular and neurobiologically plausible example
of variational free energy minimisation is Winkler and Czigler,
2012-this issue). The notion of van Petten and Luka (2012-this issue),
who relate various components of the event related potential (ERP) to
the confirmation or disconfirmation of predictions; in other words,
the elaboration of prediction errors. Crucially, they show that late
responses “consist of two distinct components with different scalp
topographies”, one associated with semantically incongruent words and
one associated with congruent words. This illustrates the hierarchical
nature of generative models that the brain might employ, in the sense
that congruence provides a hierarchical context for semantics. From
the point of view of hierarchical models, this context would normally
be considered a higher level attribute of the models generating
predictions. The very fact that van Petten and Luka can demonstrate
the electrophysiological correlates of contextual effects suggests
that the brain must indeed be representing hierarchical attributes of
the sensorium and may be so doing in terms of prediction errors. I
also liked their observation that the meaning of “predict” derives
from its origin in Latin — The fundamental architectural role of
hierarchies in cross modal sensory integration suggests that Cheung
and Bar (2012-this issue) provide a compelling analysis of prediction
and generative modelling from the point of view of visual research in
cognitive neuroscience. The mechanistic implications of the visual
mismatch negativity are explored in Kimura (2012-this issue) who lends
this interpretation a validity, in terms of things such as
representational momentum and perceptual sequence learning. Crucially,
Kimura invokes “a bi-directional cortical network that includes the
visual extra striate in prefrontal areas”:The notion of bi-directional
message passing in cortical networks is a key tenet of predictive
coding. For those readers not familiar with neuronal implementations
of predictive coding, it is remarkably simple: Current thinking is
that the representations of the causes of sensory inputs (for example
an object in the field of view or an auditory object) are encoded at
multiple hierarchical levels by the activity of deep pyramidal cells
that send backward projections to lower cortical levels. These
backward projections preferentially target superficial layers in the
cortex that house superficial pyramidal cells thought to report
prediction errors. Prediction errors are simply the difference between
the representations encoded at any level in the hierarchy and the top-
down predictions generated by the brain's internal model. The
formation of prediction errors rests upon simple synaptic mechanisms,
where the predictions inhibit prediction error units
(polysynaptically), while the representational units being predicted
excite them. The resulting activity in superficial pyramidal cells is
then passed through forward extrinsic connections to adjust
representational units at higher levels. This reciprocal message
passing proceeds until prediction error is minimised throughout all
levels of the hierarchy; thereby affording a Bayes-optimal
representation of sensory causes at multiple levels of description.
Fig. 1 illustrates this scheme.Interestingly, given the focus of this
special issue on event related potentials, the superficial pyramidal
cells thought to report prediction errors are exactly the same cell
populations that predominate in non-invasive electromagnetic
recordings. In other words, the explanation of a mismatch negativity
in terms of prediction error has a high degree of biological
plausibility, under these predictive coding schemes. A key aspect of
hierarchical representations or generative models is exemplified in
the papers on music perception. As noted by Rohrmeier and Koelsch
(2012-this issue), “It is well understood that constant predictive
activity is indispensable and vital for survival”. This constancy
speaks to multiple temporal scales and a separation of those scales in
a hierarchical setting. This is illustrated nicely in Schwartze et al.
(2012-this issue) who describe “a model of temporal processing in
audition and speech that involves a division of labour between the
cerebellum and the basal ganglia in tracing acoustic events in time”.
In their model, they assign the cerebellum a special role in modelling
temporal structure with a high temporal precision, while the basal
ganglia-thalamo-cortical system evaluates slower “longer range”
temporal structure. This “division of labour” is exactly the same in
formal models of predictive coding. In these models, high level
central pattern generators (that exhibit winnerless competition)
provide the slower temporal structure that guides faster dynamics
controlling the amplitude and frequency modulation of predicted
acoustic input (Kiebel et al., 2009). Although “fully fledged music
prediction cannot be modelled at present” (Rohrmeier and Koelsch,
2012-this issue) both simulations of this sort and the empirical
evidence that they review, shed light on the nature of “interactive
predictive mechanisms”.Up until now, we have focussed on the
minimisation of prediction error in terms of self organised neuronal
activity in response to sensory surprises or new stimuli. However,
exactly the same principle can be applied to any other attribute of
the brain's generative model; including synaptic connection strengths
or efficacy. The suppression of prediction errors through changes in
coupling among brain areas corresponds to Friston, 2010). Janacsek and
Nemeth look at perceptual learning in terms of consolidation and, in
particular “implicit sequence learning that not only underlies motor
but cognitive and social skills as well”. Interestingly, they note
consolidation of memory traces after the initial acquisition can
“result in increased resistance to interference or even improvement in
performance following an offline period”. This is a fascinating
observation that suggests optimisation of the brain's generative model
does not necessarily need online sensory data. Indeed, there are
current theories about the role of sleep in optimising the brain's
generative model, not in terms of its ability to accurately predict
data, but in terms of minimising complexity. Mathematically, this is
interesting because surprise or model evidence can be decomposed into
accuracy and complexity terms; suggesting that model evidence can be
increased by removing redundant model components or parameters
(Friston, 2010). This provides a nice Bayesian perspective on synaptic
pruning and the issues considered by Németh and Janacsek (2012-this
issue).4As noted above, a simple extension to predictive coding is to
consider their suppression by the motor system. In this extension,
prediction errors are not just suppressed by optimising top-down or
descending predictions but can also be reduced by changing sensory
input. This does not necessarily mean visual or auditory input but the
proprioceptive input responding to bodily movements. As noted above,
the suppression of proprioceptive prediction errors is, of course,
just the classical reflex arc. In this view, motor control becomes a
function of descending predictions about anticipated or predicted
kinematic trajectories. See Fig. 1 for a schematic. The important
observation here is that the same sorts of synaptic mechanisms and
inferential principles can be applied to both perception and the
consequences of action. This nicely accommodates the literature on
error related negativity reviewed by Hoffmann and Falkenstein
(2012-this issue); who consider the “monitoring of one’s own actions”
and its role in adjusting behaviour. Again, the focus is on EEG,
suggesting that even within single trial recordings, the
neurophysiological correlates of behaviour-dependent prediction errors
can be observed empirically. In their words: “The initiated response
is compared with the desired response and a difference; i.e., mismatch
between both representations induces the error negativity”. This is
not the proprioceptive prediction error that drives reflex arcs but a
high level perceptual (or indeed conceptual) prediction error;
suggesting that the long-term hierarchical predictions of unfolding
sensory and kinematic changes have been violated. In other words,
these phenomena speak again to separation of temporal scales and
hierarchies in providing multimodal predictions to the peripheral
sensory and motor systems.Active inference means that movements are
caused by top-down predictions, which means that the brain must have a
model of what caused these movements. This begs the interesting
question as to whether there is any sense of agency associated with
representations. In other words, if I expect to move my fingers and
classical motor reflexes cause them to move, do I need to know that it
was me who initiated the movement? Furthermore, can I disambiguate
between me as the agent or another. These are deep questions and move
us on to issues of self modelling and action observation:5In a nice
analysis of agency, gait and self consciousness, Kannape and Blanke
(2012-this issue) start by acknowledging: “Agency is an important
aspect of bodily self consciousness, allowing us to separate own
movements from those induced by the environment and to distinguish own
movements from those of other agents”. They also note that
“participants self attribute their own movements (i.e. experience a
sense of agency for their own movements)”, even when exogenous
perturbations cause them to unconsciously change their movement
trajectories. These observations tell us something extremely subtle
but profound about the representation of self and the production of
behaviour: We are apparently remarkably ignorant of perturbations and
fluctuations to our intended movements; ignorant in the sense that
they do not need to be represented explicitly. This fits comfortably
within the predictive coding framework, in that if low-level (reflex
arc) mechanisms can explain away prediction error in the periphery,
then there is no need to adjust perceptual representations to
accommodate them centrally. This suggests that movements are indeed
the product of top-down predictions, whose violations are not detected
Fig. 2). The example in Fig. 2 starts to address the notion of models
of self and others that guide behavioural sequences, perhaps in
language and social discourse. Gomot (2012-this issue) consider autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) in terms of a failure of implicit high level
generative models of others and the interpersonal context in which
motor behaviour is generated (predicted). Indeed they note,
“substantial differences in how the ASD predicts the environment might
have a fundamental role in the deficit revealed in the highly
unpredictable social world”. They develop their argument in terms of a
compromised ability to build “flexible” predictions and discuss the
putative role of impaired top-down influences. It is precisely these
top-down or descending influences that predictive coding will
associate with predictions and, at the sensorimotor level, constitute
the motoric substrates of interpersonal communication and
avoidance.The basic message here is that a fundamental failing of
predictive coding mechanisms may underpin many neuropsychiatric
disorders, particularly those that involve complicated or difficult
Bayesian inference problems that predictive coding tries to solve. If
this is the case, one might expect empirical evidence for failures of
predictive coding at all levels of the hierarchy, including the
elaboration of mismatch negativities. This is precisely what we see;
and is nicely discussed in the final two papers considered in this
review. Todd et al. (2012-this issue) start by noting that “since the
first publication in 1991, over 120 papers have commented on the
reduced amplitude of mismatch negativity in schizophrenia”. They
pursue the interpretation of the MMN as “a prediction error signal”
and link the theoretical neurobiology inherent in predictive coding
with the pathophysiology and psychopathology of schizophrenia. It is
interesting that, from a theoretical perspective, one of the key
predictions of abnormal inference in predictive coding would be an
abnormal perceptual learning and reduced amplitude of prediction error
signals in the odd-ball paradigm. At the same time, empirical studies
over the past decade or so have highlighted this as probably one of
the most consistent electrophysiological signatures of schizophrenia.
Ford and Mathalon (2012-this issue) take up the theme of predictive
coding and schizophrenia explicitly, in terms of a sense of agency.
Their focus here is on the efference copy and 6In conclusion, we have
seen how many papers in this special issue can be read like the
chapters of a book that takes us from the basic fundaments of
perceptual inference to a plausible and principled understanding of
auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia. Clearly, this may reflect
the astute way in which authors were invited to contribute but, I
suspect, also reflects the fact that when people ask deep questions
about how the brain works, they generally this converge on the same
veridical answers.