This article is about set switching and action selection during the
execution of cued responses. It offers a straightforward account of
dopamine in optimising behaviour in the context of (Bayes-optimal)
predictive coding. Our focus is on the consequences of depleting
dopamine and simulating perseveration that is characteristic of
Parkinson's disease, using synthetic neuronal models based upon [1].
In brief, the emergent role of dopamine is to report the precision or
salience of perceptual cues that portend a predictable sequence of
sensorimotor events. In this sense, it mediates the affordance of cues
that elicit motor behaviour [2]; in much the same way that attention
mediates the salience of cues in the perceptual domain. Gibson defined
affordances as [3], objectively measurable and independent of the
ability to recognize them but always in relation to the actor [4].
Affordance is therefore an attribute of a cue and has to be inferred.
Crucially, in this paper, inferring that an object has affordance
necessarily entails an action. We hope to establish a central role for
dopamine in this inference and implicit action selection.Dopamine has
been implicated in a bewildering variety of processes and pathologies
in the human brain; ranging from cortical excitability to attentional
deficits [5], [6]; from motor control to akinesia and set switching
deficits in Parkinson's disease [7], [8], [9]; from working memory to
schizophrenia [10], [11]; from reinforcement learning to addiction
[12], [13]; from executive function to age-related cognitive decline
[14]; from reward prediction to failures of incentive salience [15],
[16]; from exploration to psychomotor poverty [17]. In fact, it is
difficult to find an area of neuroscience that does not implicate
dopamine; for example, it has key roles in mood, sleep, nociception,
and prolactin production. In terms of its functional or computational
roles, it has been suggested that dopamine reports reward prediction
errors, hedonic value, incentive salience, novelty, and so on. Many
accounts appeal to optimal decision theory and reinforcement learning
to understand the putative role of dopamine in formal terms [18],
[19], [20], [21]. These treatments rest on the assumption that
behaviour is optimal in relation to some reward or cost function and
invoke various heuristics from control theory (e.g., dynamic
programming) to explain the computational role of dopamine.This
article takes a different view and considers that behaviour is Bayes-
optimal in the sense that it maximises the Bayesian evidence for an
actor's model of the world or, equivalently, minimises surprise. We
have formulated this as [1], [22], [23]. Active inference can be seen
as an embodied (enactivist) form of predictive coding, in which
perception minimises exteroceptive prediction errors and action
minimises proprioceptive prediction errors. Put simply, active
inference is predictive coding with classical motor reflexes. In this
setting, cost functions are replaced by surprise or prediction error,
in the sense that the only optimal behaviour is a behaviour that
brings about expected outcomes (i.e., minimises surprise as opposed to
cost). This ensures that agents avoid potentially harmful or
surprising exchanges with the environment and equips them with a
physiological and ethological homoeostasis. Note that this does impose
constraints on behaviour, since appropriate priors can replicate the
effect of any cost function [1]. In short, rewards are just familiar
sensory states. This perspective has three advantages over reward-
based accounts: first, it resolves the tautology inherent in the
notion of reward. This tautology follows from the fact that reward is
used to explain reward seeking behaviour [24], while at the same time
being defined in terms of its ability to elicit reward seeking
behaviour. Second, it dispenses with the intractable solutions of
control theory problems (e.g., Bellman optimality equations) that are
necessary to optimise reward or cost functions [25], [26], [27].
Finally, and central to this paper, it provides a novel perspective on
the role of dopamine that accounts for its apparently diverse roles in
terms of a single mechanism, operating at different levels of the
sensorimotor hierarchy.The Bayesian perspective suggests that there
are only two sorts of things that need to be inferred about the world;
namely, the state of the world and uncertainty about that state. We
have suggested that predicted states of the world are encoded in terms
of synaptic activity, while uncertainty is encoded by synaptic gain
that encodes the precision (inverse amplitude or variance) of random
fluctuations about predicted states [28]. If true, this means that
modulators of synaptic gain (like dopamine) do not report perceptual
content but the context in which percepts are formed. In other words,
dopamine reports the precision or salience of sensorimotor constructs
(representations) encoded by the activity of the synapses they
modulate. This leads to a view of dopaminergic projections that select
salient processing channels and associated actions. Physiologically,
this is compatible with short latency dopamine bursts in the basal
ganglia that occur after any salient event, whether rewarding or not
[29]. In this view, dopaminergic discharges do not signify reward
prediction errors but are an integral part of Bayes-optimal perception
and sensorimotor integration: they respond to salient or precise cues
that portend a predictable sequence of sensorimotor events that will
be registered by specific proprioceptive and exteroceptive processing
channels. Crucially, these responses will appear to be reward-related,
because they precede sensorimotor sequences that lead to a rewarding
(familiar) state. In other words, if a sequence of choices is
predictable they lead to unsurprising outcomes, which are, by
definition, rewarding. However, the agent may have no concept or
representation of reward; it is just doing what it expects to do in
the context established by the pattern of dopamine firing.The
motivation and mechanisms behind the role of dopamine considered in
this paper are exactly the same as we have proposed for the
attentional modulation of postsynaptic gain in sensory processing
[30]. Both attentional modulation and dopaminergic gating may
represent a Bayes-optimal encoding of precision that enhances the
processing of particular sensory representations by selectively
biasing bottom-up sensory information (prediction errors). In other
words, it confers salience on attended representations [31], [32],
[33], [34], [35], [36], [37]. The specific role of dopaminergic
neurotransmission in behaviour (as opposed to perception) may be
explained by the regional specificity of its projection fields (and
postsynaptic receptor subtypes) that are mainly confined to cortical
and subcortical structures concerned with predicting choices and motor
responses [38]. This is important because it means that dopamine may
be exclusively concerned with salient representations that have
affordance; in other words, sensorimotor representations that predict
both perceptual and behavioural consequences. If true, this means
dopamine has a crucial role in biasing sensorimotor integration and
action selection. More formally, dopamine is in a position to select
the proprioceptive and exteroceptive signals (prediction errors) that
compete for higher level explanation by controlling their precision.
This formulation sits comfortably with the affordance competition
hypothesis [2], [39] and other theoretical accounts: for example, the
uncertainty processing theory of motivation [40], neurobiological
accounts of decision-making [41], [42] and the plurality of roles
suggested by the physiology of dopamine [43]. In particular, it draws
on the same notions that link dopamine to the encoding of uncertainty
[44] and adaptive responses to changes in neuronal signal to noise
levels [45], [46]. This is because precision represents uncertainty
due to random fluctuations or noise. By associating salience with
precision we can also connect to constructs like [47] and [48].
Indeed, it has been shown that action selection can be cast as signal
selection using salience to report the “propensity for selecting a
given action” [49]. Note that precision or salience is an attribute of
a (probabilistic) representation that determines the confidence or
certainty about what is represented; where the salience of sensory
representations can be manipulated experimentally, by changing signal
to noise levels or contrast. We will see an example of this later.
Finally, the notion that dopamine modulates synaptic gain plays a key
role in several proposals. It has been argued for in [50] and used in
several Parkinson's disease modelling papers [51], [52].In this paper,
the hypothesis that dopamine release reports precision or uncertainty
is based purely on its synaptic physiology. However, there is
definitive neurophysiological evidence for this role of dopamine [44],
where, for example, dopaminergic discharges covary with the variance
or precision of juice rewards [53]. More generally, nearly every
experimental manipulation evoking dopaminergic responses (novelty,
unexpected rewards, etc) speaks to a change in the level of precision
or confidence about subsequent contingencies. In what follows, we try
to substantiate the above ideas using theoretical arguments based upon
active inference and then illustrate their plausibility using
simulations of cued responses. These simulations are concerned with
the consequences of depleting dopaminergic neurotransmission to
illustrate its central role in action selection and set switching.
They can therefore be regarded as a very simple model of Parkinson's
disease. This means we will not address changes in precision but
assume that the tonic activity of dopaminergic neurons encodes a fixed
level of precision or uncertainty [44], [43], [45]. Subsequent papers
will focus on the control of (phasic and tonic) dopaminergic responses
[54]. Furthermore, we will restrict our discussion to the generic
effect of dopamine on postsynaptic D1 receptors located on principal
cells throughout the brain [55]. This necessarily precludes a proper
consideration of the balance between D1 and D2 receptor function and
its relationship to the functional anatomy of the basal ganglia in
Parkinson's disease [56].The models and methods section reviews the
theory on which subsequent simulations are based. This section
presents a brief review of the free energy principle, with a special
focus on active inference and the role of synaptic gain in encoding
precision. The basic theory and ensuing differential equations used to
simulate neuronal responses are exactly the same as those used to
illustrate perceptual inference, learning, attention and action in a
series of previous papers (Table 1). This formalism is then used to
model sequential cued movements, under normal and, in the results
section, depleted levels of dopamine. The particular simulations used
in this paper rest on prior beliefs about sensorimotor trajectories,
encoded by itinerant (wandering) dynamics in premotor cortex. These
dynamics are entrained by prediction errors from the superior
colliculus, the parietal cortex and motor cortex, whose precision is,
we assume, controlled by dopamine. Using this architecture, we can
simulate visually cued sequences of movements and, crucially,
responses to sequence violations. By adding a further (prefrontal)
level to the model, we examine how the ability to switch from one
sequence to another is compromised when sensorimotor cues lose
precision. The resulting impact on set switching is characterised in
terms of (synthetic) neuronal responses and behavioural (reaction time
and accuracy) measures. We conclude with a discussion of the
implications for dopamine in motor control and set switching
generally, and for Parkinson's disease
specifically.10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002327.t001Table 1DomainProcess or
paradigmPerception [70]  [70] Sensory learning [139] Attention [30]
[30] Motor control [22]  [22]  [23] Sensorimotor integration [22]
Behavior [140]  [1] Action observation [23] In this section, we
briefly overview the free energy principle and active inference to
frame the role of dopamine examined later. The free energy principle
proposes that the states and infrastructure of a self organising
system, such as the brain, should minimise the free energy of the
sensory states it samples [57]. Free energy is an upper bound on the
surprise associated with sensory signals, where surprise is
mathematically the same as the (negative log) Bayesian evidence for
the system's model of its world. Evidence is just the probability of
getting some data under the model of those data. This means that
minimising free energy reduces surprising exchanges with the
environment or, equivalently, maximises the evidence for an agent's
internal model of its sensorium. This principle entails two
corollaries; the Bayesian brain hypothesis [58], [59]; [60], [61] and
active inference [1], [22], [23]. The Bayesian brain hypothesis means
that the brain will try to predict its sensory inputs in a Bayes-
optimal fashion by representing their causes in terms of hidden states
of the world. Active inference equips the Bayesian brain with motor
reflex arcs that ensure its predictions are fulfilled (by suppressing
proprioceptive prediction errors). In active inference, behaviour
emerges as natural consequence of high-level representations
(sensorimotor constructs) that have both sensory (exteroceptive) and
motor (proprioceptive) consequences. These constructs or
representations are maintained by bottom-up prediction errors in both
modalities and reciprocate top-down (proprioceptive) predictions to
the peripheral motor system that drive classical motor reflexes; while
top-down predictions to sensory systems play the role of corollary
discharge and suppress (exteroceptive) prediction errors.Crucially,
high-level sensorimotor representations can be dynamic in nature, with
itinerant dynamics (on attractor manifolds) that embody prior beliefs
about the sequence of sensorimotor events or trajectories that will
unfold in the near future. These can be regarded as central pattern
generators or attractors that provide proprioceptive and sensory
predictions for sensorimotor integration; in other words,
representations of affordance [23]. The particular sequence currently
active depends upon which attractor has been selected. This selection
rests upon precise bottom-up prediction errors conveying salient
sensory information that has yet to be explained. In this scheme,
prediction errors can induce or destroy metastable attractors at
higher levels to select the trajectory that best explains sensory
input. This can be regarded as selecting an attractor with an
affordance that best explains sensory input; cf., “affordance
competition” in [2]. The potency with which ascending prediction
errors can select the appropriate attractor depends upon their
postsynaptic gain. This gain encodes the precision (inverse variance)
of random fluctuations about predictions. In other words, the ability
of bottom-up prediction errors to bias competition among high level
sensorimotor representations (attractors) depends upon their precision
that we presume, in this paper, is modulated by dopamine. In the
results section, we will see an example of these dynamics and what
happens when the precision of prediction errors is reduced by
(simulating) a reduction in dopaminergic neurotransmission. We
hypothesised that this would result in a failure of set switching and
the perseveration of sensorimotor dynamics of the sort seen in
Parkinson's disease [7], [62], [63]. In what follows, we will unpack
the above summary in slightly more formal terms:The equations and
simulations used in this paper may appear a bit complicated and The
brain minimises the free energy of sensory inputs defined by a
generative model.The generative model used by the brain is
hierarchical, nonlinear and dynamic.Neuronal firing rates encode the
most likely state of the world, under this model.The first assumption
is the free energy principle, which leads to active inference when
considering both representations and action. This principle has to be
true, in the sense that a failure to minimise free energy means that
the brain will entertain increasingly surprising sensations and, at
some point, will cease to exist in an ergodic sense. The second
assumption is motivated easily by noting that the world is both
dynamic and nonlinear. Hierarchical causal structure emerges
inevitably from a separation of temporal scales. This can be seen most
clearly in the [64], [65], where slow ordered dynamics emerge at a
macroscopic scale and enslave fast fluctuations at a microscopic
scale. Finally, the third assumption follows from the first, under the
constraint that probabilistic representations are encoded by a minimum
number of biophysical variables. This leads to something called the
Laplace assumption, in which the probability density function over
hidden states is Gaussian and can be encoded by its mean or
expectation. In terms of neural codes, this is referred to this as the
[66].Given these three assumptions, one can simulate a whole variety
of situations and processes by simply specifying the particular
equations that constitute the generative model. The resulting
perception and action is specified completely by the above assumptions
and can be implemented in a biologically plausible way as described in
previous applications listed in Table 1. In brief, these simulations
use differential equations that minimise the free energy of sensory
input using a generalised gradient descent [67].[68]. The free energy
To perform neuronal simulations under this framework it is only
necessary to integrate or solve Equation 1 to simulate neuronal
dynamics that encode the conditional predictions and ensuing action.
Conditional predictions depend upon the brain's generative model of
the world, which we assume has the following (hierarchical) formGiven
the form of the generative model (Equation 2) we can now write down
the differential equations (Equation 1) describing neuronal dynamics
in terms of (precision-weighted) prediction errors on the hidden
causes and states It is difficult to overstate the generality and
importance of Equation 3: its solutions grandfather nearly every known
statistical estimation scheme, under parametric assumptions about
additive or multiplicative noise [69]. These range from ordinary least
squares to advanced variational deconvolution schemes. The resulting
scheme is called [67]. In neural network terms, Equation 3 says that
error-units receive predictions from the same level and the level
above. Conversely, prediction-units are driven by prediction errors
from the same level and the level below. These constitute bottom-up
and lateral messages that drive conditional expectations towards a
better prediction to reduce the prediction error in the level below.
This is the essence of recurrent message passing between hierarchical
levels to optimise free energy or suppress prediction error: see [70],
for a more detailed discussion. In neurobiological implementations of
this scheme, the sources of bottom-up prediction errors, in the
cortex, are thought to be superficial pyramidal cells that send
forward connections to higher cortical areas. Conversely, predictions
are conveyed from deep pyramidal cells, by backward connections, to
target (polysynaptically) the superficial pyramidal cells encoding
prediction error [71], [70]. The laminar specificity of the cells of
origin of predictions and prediction errors becomes relevant when
examining the putative role of dopamine in the encoding of
precision.Equation 3 shows that precision modulates the responses of
prediction error units to their presynaptic inputs. Here, we associate
precision with dopaminergic neuromodulation of these responses. The
action of dopamine is mediated by a family of transmembrane G protein-
coupled receptors [72] encoded by at least five dopamine receptor
genes [73]. Dopamine receptors are found throughout the soma and
dendrites of neurons but ultra-structural and biochemical evidence
suggests that they are concentrated in dendritic spines that express
glutamatergic synapses [74], [75]. Postsynaptic D1 and D2 receptors
are therefore strategically positioned to control the excitability and
synaptic properties of spines “with remarkable precision and
versatility” [76].Although dopamine appears to be a natural candidate
to modulate principal cells reporting prediction error, Equation 3
does not tell us whether prediction errors are modulated before or
after they are computed. Both mechanisms are biologically plausible:
for example, superficial pyramidal cells encoding prediction error
could be modulated by D1 receptors on the soma or initial segment,
after the integration of signals subtending prediction errors in the
dendritic tree. Conversely, precision dependent modulation could be
applied at a synaptic level to all presynaptic inputs. For dopamine,
the balance of evidence points to the latter mechanism [77]:Dopamine
innervation in the human prefrontal cortex exhibits a distinct
bilaminar distribution with dense bands of fibres in the superficial
and deep layers [78], [74]. Although some evidence suggests that
dopaminergic markers are more concentrated in deep layers [79], [80],
other studies report a higher concentration in supragranular layers
[81]. These differences may be due to regional and species differences
[82]. Here, we will focus on dopaminergic modulation of cells in the
supragranular layers, because superficial pyramidal cells are thought
to report prediction error [71]. Dopamine axons form symmetric
synapses, predominantly on the spines of pyramidal cells. In many
cases, the same spine expresses an asymmetric (excitatory) synapse. In
human and monkey prefrontal cortex, the dopamine D1-specific ligand,
3H-SCH23390, and the D2-specific ligand, H3-raclopride, label binding
sites that mirror the densest dopamine innervation [78], [83]. This
suggests that the primary role of D1 receptors is to modulate
presynaptic input to pyramidal cells at the dendritic level [77],
[74]. In terms of the implicit computational architecture, we can
therefore assume that dopamine gates or modulates the dendritic
responses of superficial pyramidal cells, such that dopamine selects
afferents encoding sensory information (prediction error) in
proportion to its precision. Figure 1 provides a schematic of the
neuronal circuitry implied by this assumption, in which dopamine
modulates doubly-innervated spines of superficial pyramidal cells
receiving excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic inputs [84];
corresponding to conditional expectations and their predictions
respectively. The opposing effects of these presynaptic inputs on
postsynaptic depolarisation form a prediction error signal that is
modulated at the level of the dendritic spine by dopamine. In this
scheme, the tonic firing of a particular dopaminergic cell or
population encodes the precision or salience of the information
(prediction error) conveyed by the cells that it targets. One might
imagine that phasic discharges report changes in the current context
and signal a change in the relative precision (uncertainty) over
different sensory channels and conditional predictions. In this paper,
we will assume that the precision at each hierarchical level is
constant and address the (phasic) control of dopaminergic activity in
terms of optimisation of (state-dependent) precision
elsewhere.Clearly, in sensorimotor hierarchies [85], the relative
levels of neuromodulatory gating (precision) at different levels can
have a profound effect on perception and behaviour, because it will
select particular processing channels and change the balance between
bottom-up sensory information and top-down prior expectations. In
hierarchical models, these prior expectations are called [22] for
details.Affordance is generally conceived of as the opportunities for
action offered by the environment to an agent [4]. This depends on
both the environment and the nature of the actor. For example, an axe
only affords the possibility of use when it can be wielded. In this
paper, affordance is an attribute of amodal representations at higher
hierarchical levels that make both sensory and motor predictions (an
‘axe’ entails predictions not only about how it looks or feels, but
also the kinaesthetic consequences of wielding it). Conditional
expectations or representations with affordance elicit behaviour by
sending top-down predictions down the hierarchy that are unpacked into
proprioceptive predictions at the level of the cranial nerve nuclei
and spinal-cord. These engage classical reflex arcs to produce the
predicted motor trajectory. The action of dopamine in this context is
to modulate or enable the salience of representations that have
affordance, and hence the probability they will be enacted.In summary,
we have derived equations for the dynamics of perception and action
using a free energy formulation of adaptive (Bayes-optimal) exchanges
with the world and a generative model that is both generic and
biologically plausible. In what follows, we use Equations 3 and 4 to
simulate neuronal and behavioural responses. A technical treatment of
the material above will be found in [67], which provides the details
of the scheme used to integrate (solve) Equation 1 to produce the
simulations considered next.The preceding scheme allows one to
simulate (Bayes-optimal) responses in terms of neuronal activity and
motor behaviour, under any plausible generative model. Here, we
consider a particular model, described in terms of the functions in
Equation 2 that leads to a sequence of pointing movements, elicited by
a sequence of visual cues. This model of sensorimotor integration
provides the basis for simple simulated lesion experiments, in which
we can deplete levels of simulated dopamine (precision) in different
parts of the brain, and examine the consequences.Because the
differential equations governing perception and action are coupled
(Equation 1), we need to specify two mappings: the generative model
used by the brain, whose inversion maps from sensations to action, and
the process by which action produces sensations. To distinguish
between real states generating sensory information and the hidden
states assumed by the generative model, we will use bold and italic
variables respectively. Sensory input was generated using the
following equations, which constitute real world dynamics that are
hidden from the agent:[86].The second differential equation describes
how changes in arm position and target salience depend upon action and
exogenous causes respectively: the direction of the arm changes as a
sigmoid (hyperbolic tangent) function of action and decays back to its
resting position in the absence of action. The salience of each
location is increased by exogenous causes Clearly, to integrate
Equation 5 we need not only the exogenous causes (that specify
sequence of visual cues) but also action that depends upon the
perceptual inversion of a generative model. The generative model here
was chosen to include several features of sensorimotor integration and
hierarchical dynamics in the simplest way possible. It considers the
brain to model the sensory world as a succession of unstable fixed
points in some abstract state space. In other words, the agent expects
the world to change continuously, with an itinerant (wandering)
trajectory, visiting different states in succession. These reflect
prior beliefs about forthcoming sensory events, and are encoded by
differential equations that embody metastable dynamics; e.g.,
winnerless competition; [87], [88]. The resulting attractors can be
thought of as central pattern generators that can be nested
hierarchically at different time scales [89] to produce exteroceptive
and proprioceptive (i.e., sensorimotor) predictions. These predictions
are entrained by perception and prescribe motor responses through
active inference. An important aspect of these generative models is
that high level dynamics determine the context or set that engages
lower-level sensorimotor sequences. In what follows, we will exploit
this hierarchical aspect to illustrate some generic features of set
switching and action selection and how they depend on the delicate
balance of precision over different hierarchical levels.The generative
model used by our simulated agent had two levels and the following
form (a particular case of Equation 2):[90]. This is because
perception would infer that the affordance of a particular target was
high. The associated conditional expectations would then induce
proprioceptive predictions that would be fulfilled by action; such
that the agent would point towards the target. In an experimental
setting, these prior beliefs may be instantiated through task
instructions.However, we will consider a more sophisticated and
realistic model, in which the agent has prior beliefs about the
sequence in which targets will appear. This sort of prior belief could
be instantiated by repeated exposure to the same sequence. These prior
beliefs are encoded by the function Figure 2). The speed of these
sequential dynamics is governed by the hidden cause The final part of
the model endows the agent with the concept that cues may or may not
be ordered. We model this in terms of the hidden cause that controls
the speed of the sequence. Crucially, this hidden cause is itself a
softmax function of a hidden state that is part of a slower itinerant
cycle (by factor of eight), governed by the same winnerless
competition among the hidden states; [87].In summary, the agent
believes that it will point towards salient cues when they appear.
Furthermore, it believes that these cues would appear one at a time;
either in a fixed (clockwise) sequence or with no sequential
contingencies. Although this is a very simple model of the world, it
allows us to demonstrate sensorimotor integration in the context of
cued motor actions, biasing of action selection in terms of sequential
anticipations and set switching that depends upon recognising the
context (sequential or random) in which cues appear. Our particular
interest here is in how manipulating the precision (dopamine) at
various levels in this hierarchical model will impact on cued
responses. The interesting behaviour depends entirely upon the prior
beliefs entailed by the form of the generative model and its equations
of motion. These are shown schematically in Figure 3, which highlights
the difference between the structured and dynamical expectations
implicit in the generative model (left panels) and the relatively
simple dynamics underlying the generation of sensory input (right
panels). This emphasises the fact that real behaviour emerges through
the expectations and active sampling of the environment that an agent
brings to the world: expectations that are embodied in its generative
model. It should be emphasised, that despite the complexity of these
models, perception and action can be accounted for by one
straightforward principle; namely the minimisation of free energy, as
in Equation 1.If we substitute the generative model in Equation 6 into
the message passing (generalised predictive coding) scheme in Equation
3, we arrived at the network architecture shown in Figure 4. To lend
this architecture a neurobiological plausibility, we have assigned the
prediction and error units to neuronal populations in various cortical
and subcortical structures. At the sensory level, we have placed
sensory prediction error in extrinsic (visual) coordinates in the
parietal cortex and the salience (e.g., illumination) of the four
target locations in the superior colliculus; cf., [91]. Predictions
about the first level hidden states have been divided into
proprioceptive (angular position) and affordance states in the motor
and premotor cortex respectively; cf., [92]. The motor cortex sends
top-down projections to the parietal cortex and spinal-cord to
suppress visual prediction errors and elicit motor reflexes
respectively. In contrast, the premotor cortex sends top-down
predictions about visual salience to the superior colliculus.
Predictions about second level causes and states have been assigned to
the basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex respectively. These encode the
set (sequential or random context) currently inferred. The basal
ganglia and prefrontal cortex exchange predictions and prediction
errors through cortico-subcortical loops, while the basal ganglia
exchanges signals with the premotor cortex to optimise predictions
about affordance. The blue arrows arising from the substantia nigra
and ventral tegmental area (SN/VTA) are meant to indicate the main
(dopaminergic) projections from this area that we assume modulate the
postsynaptic gain of the principal cells (red circles) elaborating
prediction errors. The activities of these (nigrotectal, nigrostriatal
and mesocortical) dopaminergic projections encode the precision of
prediction errors at different levels of the sensorimotor hierarchy.
Although the recent literature on the (mesorhombencephalic)
nigrotectal pathway, from SN to the superior colliculus, focuses on
GABAergic projections, a substantial proportion of nigrotectal
projection neurons use dopamine [93], [94], [95].The model above is
sufficient to engender cued reaching movements, which are anticipatory
if the agent correctly infers that the cues are presented in a fixed
(clockwise) sequence. However, if we reverse the order of the stimuli,
there should be accuracy and reaction time costs, due to the fact that
the sequence cannot be predicted under clockwise beliefs about the
sequence. Furthermore, there should be a set switching cost as the
hidden states at the second (context) level are inferred and the
itinerant dynamics at the first (affordance) level are suppressed.
When we integrated Equation 1, this is precisely what was found:
Figure 5 shows the results of a simulation using log precisions of
four (a relatively high precision) throughout the hierarchy. In this
example, the target locations appeared every 12 time bins (of 64 ms)
using Gaussian bump functions of time. The first five targets were in
the (expected) clockwise order, while last five were presented in an
anticlockwise order. The resulting conditional predictions and
prediction errors are shown in the top four panels of Figure 5, while
the trajectory in extrinsic coordinates and the underlying action are
shown in the bottom panels (left and right respectively). The upper
left panel shows the conditional predictions of sensory signals and
sensory prediction errors (in red). These are errors on the salience,
proprioceptive and visual input, which, as can be seen, are small in
relation to predictions. The predictions were based upon the hidden
states shown on the upper right. One can see the itinerant cycling
over conditional expectations of hidden affordances (large amplitude
lines) that are inferred with a high degree of conditional confidence
(the grey areas correspond to 90% Bayesian confidence intervals). The
interesting aspect of these results lie in the middle two panels that
show the conditional expectations of the hidden causes and states at
the second level, encoding the context or set. These results show that
it takes about two movements or trials before there is a confident
inference that the context has changed. This inferential set switching
is driven by the large (downward) deflection in prediction error shown
in red (left middle panel). Note that with these precisions, behaviour
is accurate and fast and that the violation of sequential expectations
is barely discernible. In other words, the precision of sensory
information is sufficient to override top-down prior expectations of a
sequential sort, when they are clearly violated. However, as we will
see later, there is a performance cost in terms of reaction time and
accuracy.The same simulated neuronal responses are shown in Figure 6,
where they are shown alongside their associated brain structure. This
figure tries to illustrate how neuronal dynamics unfold at different
timescales in different parts of the brain to produce motor behaviour.
Crucially, all the hierarchically deployed dynamics are both entrained
by and entrain dynamics in lower levels, through the recurrent message
passing implicit in generalised predictive coding. By design, we have
placed the slower dynamics in higher (more anterior) brain areas [96],
[97], [98]–[99], [100]. The neuroanatomical interpretation of this
simulation should not be taken too seriously but illustrates the fact
that the scheme is (in principle) biologically plausible, both in
terms of its dynamical formulation and the functional anatomy of
sensorimotor hierarchies in the brain.In summary, we have created a
generative model that illustrates the itinerant and dynamic
sensorimotor constructs that might be used by the brain to predict
cued sequential behaviours and set switching in response to changing
contingencies. It is worth noting, that this relatively simple model
has implicitly modelled (and integrated) a number of apparently
disparate processes in cognitive neuroscience: for example, Bayes-
optimal sensorimotor integration, evidence accumulation, anticipation,
short term (working) memory, action selection, set switching and a
simple form of reversal learning (in terms of switching to a new
contingency). We mean this in the straightforward sense that to
perform accurately, the simulated agent has to remember the sequence
of cues in terms of delay period activity in the premotor and
prefrontal cortex [101], encoded here in terms of conditional beliefs
about the dynamics of hidden states. Furthermore, to respond optimally
the agent has to recognize a reversal in the sequence of cues and
adjust its internal representation of context accordingly.
Interestingly, [102] presents a model of working memory using exactly
the same winnerless (generalized Lotka-Volterra) dynamics used in this
paper. Using this model, they show that working memory capacity has an
upper bound of seven items, under plausible assumptions about lateral
neuronal interactions. Crucially, the cognitive processes like working
memory do not need to be modelled explicitly but emerge from the
Bayesian inversion of a generative model. In future work, we will use
the same model to study learning and working memory; however, our
current focus is on how Bayes-optimal behaviour degrades when we
reduce the precision of prediction errors:In this section, we repeat
the above simulations under different levels of precision in the
putative targets of dopaminergic projections. This is meant to
simulate depleted levels of dopamine; acting at postsynaptic D1
receptors to reduce postsynaptic gain (see Figure 1). First, we
reduced the log precision (by 50% in 6 steps) in the principal cells
of the superior colliculus that report the prediction errors on the
salience of target locations: The effects on conditional expectations
of hidden states and causes are shown in Figure 7 for high,
intermediate and low levels of precision (dopamine). The upper row
shows the conditional predictions of sensory input and sensory
prediction errors as in Figure 5, while the middle row shows the
conditional expectations of the hidden causes encoding context. The
most remarkable thing about these results is the failure to infer a
change in the context (or set) when dopamine is depleted. This results
in an accumulation of prediction error at the sensory level while, in
contrast, the prediction error at the second level (red lines in the
middle panels) decreases. This is an intuitive consequence of
decreasing the relative precision at lower levels of the hierarchical
model, which causes the inference to be over reliant upon top-down
priors and less confident about switching to the new context, when
sensory prediction errors are less precise.This means that it takes
longer before the second level expectations accumulate sufficient
evidence to make them switch, following the reversal of stimulus
order. At the lowest level of simulated dopamine, this switch fails
completely and the agent always expects the next target to appear in
the wrong (clockwise) location. The behavioural consequences of this
are shown graphically in the lower panels of Figure 7, in terms of the
trajectory of movements over the ten cues (trials). We see here that
the trajectory is perturbed progressively as dopamine levels fall;
with initial directions being pulled in the direction of falsely
anticipated target locations. This is shown more clearly in Figure 8,
which shows the trajectory for the lowest level of dopamine. During
the first five trials the initial excursion from the lower right
target is in the correct direction for the next target in the
(clockwise) sequence. However, after the reversal, the initial
trajectory from the lower left target is drawn towards the incorrectly
anticipated next target, requiring a corrective adjustment to the
movement trajectory, when the actual target discloses itself. Figure 9
shows the behavioural consequences of this precision or dopamine-
dependent failure to correctly infer the sequential context: the top
panel shows the reaction times (assuming 64 ms time bins) measured as
the time from the onset of the cue to the time at which the target was
reached (to within a radius of First, irrespective of the level of
dopamine, reaction times are faster when the next cue can be
anticipated. Furthermore, there is a price to be paid for this
anticipatory speeding, when sequential anticipations are violated.
This is reflected in the increased reaction times at the point of
sequence reversal for a couple of trials. It is these transient
decreases in performance that index the switching costs hypothesised
earlier. Crucially, the effect of dopamine depletion is to exacerbate
both the switching costs and the behavioural slowing when sequential
predictions no longer hold. In the limit of very low dopamine, and a
complete failure to switch sets (infer a context change), there is a
marked impairment in performance that persists following reversal.
Perhaps the most important result in Figure 9 is that the set
switching costs persist for longer with low levels of dopamine. In
other words, there is a perseveration of (suboptimal) anticipatory
motor trajectories that is exacerbated by dopamine depletion. This
latent bradykinesia and perseveration is reminiscent of the symptoms
of Parkinson's disease [103], [104], which was the motivation for
these simulations.On the basis of these results, one might predict
that the greatest difference between Parkinson's patients on and off
dopaminergic medication would be expressed most acutely in trials that
violated expectations established during sequential cueing.
Conversely, there should be relatively small differences in reaction
times when stimuli are presented in the correct sequence: cf., [105].
Furthermore, differences in reaction times with unpredictable cues
should not be marked, once patients have realised that there is no
underlying sequence. We will consider these predictions in relation to
empirical results in a forthcoming paper. It is also interesting to
relate these simulations to the results in [106], who found deficits
in probabilistic reversal learning in Parkinson's disease, where
“patients also exhibited compromised adaptability to the reversal”.
Brown and Marsden [107] investigated set switching in Parkinson's
disease using the Stroop task. Subjects had to report either the
semantic or physical colour of a word; however, the rule changed every
ten trials. The response dimension was cued before each trial or
subjects were just reminded to change the rule every ten trials.
Patients showed general psychomotor slowing but were further impaired
on the uncued condition, especially in the first trial following a
rule change.Finally, we repeated the simulated lesion experiments
above by reducing the precision in other cortical and subcortical
structures in receipt of SN/VTA projections. The most interesting
results are shown in Figure 10 in terms of simulated reaction times
over different levels of dopamine: the left panels reproduce the
reaction time data of the previous figure, while the middle panel
shows the equivalent results obtained when depleting dopamine in the
motor cortex (encoding conditional expectations about proprioceptive
inputs). The effect of dopamine depletion here is to increase reaction
times in a non-specific way. This non-specific slowing was expected,
as proprioceptive prediction errors are subverted thereby reducing
motor vigour; cf., [108]. Note that inference about affordance and set
are not affected, because these are driven by exteroceptive prediction
errors. This means there is no change in set switching or
perseveration. Conversely, when we lesion mesocortical projections to
the premotor cortex (modulating prediction errors about changes in
affordance) there are effects on both motor vigour and set switching
(right hand panels). Importantly, these effects differ from those
produced by the same lesion to the superior colliculus. Here,
depleting dopamine actually In this section, we have seen how
simulated dopamine depletion is manifest in terms of neuronal
responses encoding Bayes-optimal inferences about sensorimotor
contingencies and in terms of behavior. The key point made by the
simulations is that although dopamine may have a singular mechanism of
action and computational function (e.g., to modulate postsynaptic gain
and encode precision) the physiological and behavioral correlates of
dopamine changes depend on where in the brain they are expressed. This
reiterates the point made in the introduction that understanding the
role of dopamine may call for a multilateral perspective that
accommodates the delicate balance among distributed responses that
underlie the functional anatomy of behavior. The simulations in this
section can be regarded as a proof of principle that a single
mechanism can lead to the diverse functional consequences seen
empirically [109], [7], [110]. Here, dopamine had opposite effects on
the speed of movements (bradykinesia) depending upon whether it was
depleted at higher or lower levels of the sensorimotor hierarchy.
Conversely, simulated depletion of dopamine in the superior colliculus
(low-level) and premotor cortex (high-level) had similar effects on
perseveration. We emphasize this point because it has implications for
the computational modeling of dopamine, especially for theoretical
accounts of dopamine that consider one optimization process in
isolation (for example, associating dopamine with reward prediction
error). A nice example of the plurality of deficits following insults
to be dopamine system is provided by [111], who conclude that
Parkinson's “patients on and off medication both showed attentional
shifting deficits, but for different reasons. Deficits in non-
medicated patients were consistent with an inability to update the new
attentional set, whereas those in medicated patients were evident when
having to ignore distractors that had previously been task
relevant.”In summary, contrary to what is often assumed, dopamine may
not report the prediction error on value but the value (precision) of
prediction errors. If this is the case, one would anticipate different
behavioral deficits following dopamine depletion, depending on which
prediction errors were affected. Strategically, it may be better to
ask not what the function of dopamine tells you about a model but what
a model tells you about the function of dopamine. In this paper, the
function of dopamine is to modulate postsynaptic gain, while the model
mediates between this (neuronal) function and its behavioral and
neurophysiologic consequences. See also [11].In this paper, we have
presented a simple model of cued reaching movements and set switching
that is consistent with the notions of salience and affordance.
Furthermore, we have simulated some latent symptoms of Parkinsonism by
reducing the precision of cues that have affordance. Reducing this
precision (dopamine) delays and can even preclude set switching, with
associated costs in behavioral accuracy. When the precision of sensory
cues is removed completely, we obtain autonomous behavior that is
prescribed by the itinerant expectations of the agent (results not
shown). Crucially, these simulations are not based on an Table 1 lists
the growing number of paradigms and processes that can be explained in
terms of free energy minimization and hierarchical Bayesian inference.
The simulations in this and related papers can be reproduced from a
graphical user interface available in Matlab code
(http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/).In short, we have focused on the
role of dopamine in balancing the influence of bottom-up sensory
information and top-down (empirical) prior expectations during
perceptual inference and consequent behavior. This role is consistent
with many other theoretical treatments of dopamine in modulating top-
down effects and signal-to-noise [49], [44], [11], [112], [2], [113],
[45], [39], [40]; and contextualizes them within the formal setting of
generalized predictive coding.The simulations presented in this paper
do not attempt to cover all the physiological and computational
processes that dopamine may mediate. Our results pertain to classical
neuromodulatory postsynaptic consequences of changes in tonic dopamine
release (e.g., during depletion due to drugs or disease) on principal
cells. There are many aspects of dopaminergic function that are not
addressed by these simulations: for example, modulation of long-term
synaptic plasticity, or the differential roles of various pre- and
postsynaptic dopamine receptors. Furthermore, we have only considered
the effect of tonic or baseline dopamine levels (over long time
scales) and have ignored dopamine fluctuations on a shorter time
scale: for example, the phasic release of dopamine in response to
specific cues or its rapid clearance in the striatum by the dopamine
active transporter. However, the aim of the present work was to
highlight the computational, neurophysiologic and anatomic
considerations that suggest a unitary role for dopamine in the
encoding of precision.There is a large literature on modeling dopamine
in the context of choice and motor behavior [114], [115], [116],
[117], [118], [119]. Some of this literature is based on reinforcement
learning and optimal decision theory; and formulated at a rather
abstract level in terms of discrete state spaces and time. It is
difficult to connect the (predictive coding) process model provided in
this paper with the more descriptive (but useful) heuristics provided
by reinforcement learning and economics. One link may be via
variational Bayesian formulations of reinforcement-learning update
equations (see below), in which precision-weighted prediction errors
play a key role [120]. On the other hand, there are computational
simulations whose biological detail goes beyond the simulations in
this paper [112], [121], [122], [123]. In this sense, the simulations
reported here should be regarded as an illustration of how far one can
get in modeling neuromodulation in the larger setting of Bayes optimal
action and perception. In this context, The ideas and simulations in
this paper just show that dopamine fits comfortably into a principled
if somewhat abstract formulation of action and perception.
Specifically, it has the physiological characteristics that would be
required to fulfill a central role in Bayes-optimal inference; namely,
to encode precision or uncertainty. This is why we have focused on the
neuromodulation of postsynaptic gain in cortical cells, mediated by D1
receptors. The theoretical constraints we have considered do not
really allow us to say very much about the functional anatomy of the
cortico-basal ganglia-thalamic loops. Having said this, the dynamics
necessary for active inference are not inconsistent with many aspects
of known functional anatomy. For example, the basal ganglia are
believed to act on cortex through a process of focused disinhibition
[124]. In particular, the basal ganglia output nuclei fire tonically
to inhibit cortical activity, but strong striatal activity can reduce
this tonic activity to release target thalamic areas and their
corresponding cortical areas from inhibition. This basic functional
architecture is reflected in our simulations by the selection of an
appropriate sensorimotor set by representations of hidden causes in
the striatum that selectively enable particular attractors or central
pattern generators in premotor cortex. Note that focused disinhibition
is a necessary consequence of the dynamics on hidden states and causes
that mediate winnerless competition. In one sense, it is difficult to
imagine any alternative sort of dynamics that could prescribe unique
sequential behavior and motor trajectories.Although the computations
that minimize free energy do not predict the details of functional
anatomy (in the same way that maximizing adaptive fitness does not
predict the details of a phenotype), it does provide some interesting
insights into large-scale functional anatomy. These insights rest upon
the notion that the brain is a generative model of its environment.
This means that causal regularities in the environment should be
recapitulated in its neuroanatomy. The trick here is to think of the
brain as generating predictions of sensory input using its backward
(top-down) connections; in other words, to imagine the brain without
the forward connections that are used for perceptual inversion of its
generative model. The picture that emerges is a fine lacework of
cortical projections from high-order associative cortex that radiate
to sensory cortical areas and then send top-down predictions of
sensory input to thalamic nuclei. A nice example here is the
distinction between what and where pathways in visual processing
[125]. Their very existence suggests that the (hidden) causes of
visual inputs to the lateral geniculate nucleus are objects that can
belong to different categories and, crucially, can be in different
places. One might imagine that in a static universe, where objects
were bound to a particular place, the brain would not have separate
representations of what and where or their neuroanatomical correlates.
So what does this sort of analysis imply for the basal ganglia? We
will focus on three specific predictions:First, the fact that the
outputs of the basal ganglia are to thalamic nuclei suggests that the
basal ganglia are at a hierarchically lower level than prefrontal
cortex. For example, the ventral lateral nucleus receives inputs from
the basal ganglia (via the thalamic fasciculus) and sends outputs to
the primary motor cortex. The ventral lateral nucleus is juxtaposed to
the ventral posterolateral nucleus in receipt of proprioceptive and
somatosensory afferents via the posterior column-medial lemniscus
pathway. The implicit hierarchical level of the basal ganglia suggests
that the prefrontal cortical projections to the striatum should be of
the backwards type (originating from deep pyramidal cells). Indeed,
the cortical pyramidal neurons projecting to the striatum are located
in layers II–VI, but the densest projections come from layer V [126].
Furthermore, the medium spiny neurons that receive these
corticostriatal projections express dopaminergic (D1 - direct and D2 -
indirect pathway) receptors [127]; as would be expected, if they
played the role of prediction error units that are targeted by
backward connections.Second, in active inference, the balance between
top-down prior beliefs and bottom-up sensory information is controlled
by the relative precision of prediction errors at higher and lower
levels of cortico-basal ganglia-thalamic hierarchy. This suggests that
there will be an antagonistic control of dopaminergic projections to
the prefrontal cortex (higher level) and equivalent projections to the
striatal (lower-level). In anatomical terms, this may be reflected in
the segregation of the cells of origin of the nigrostriatal dopamine
projections (from the substantia nigra) and the cortical projections
(from the ventral tegmental area). Clearly, there are several
important functional associations in dopaminergic systems that may or
may not be understandable at this level of analysis. Key examples here
include the opposing effects of the direct and indirect pathways
[128], [129] and the opposing influences of dopamine on synaptic
plasticity [56].Finally, it is interesting to note that the number of
parameters of statistical models is generally much greater than the
degrees of freedom of their variance or precision estimates. For
example, a classical statistical model with both between and within
subject factors can have hundreds of parameters yet can be inverted
using just two precisions (modeling within and between subject
variability). This might be a simple explanation for the fact that the
number of dopaminergic cells (encoding precision or context) is much
smaller than the myriad of cells (encoding hidden causes or content)
needed to parameterize the world.The current work presents a covert
challenge to standard theories of decision-making and motor control
based upon the concept of reward or value. As hinted at in the
introduction, there is an inherent circularity in reward-based
accounts of behavior that may obscure deeper questions about behavior.
This is because (psychological) reward is defined as a process that
reinforces or modifies behavior. As such, it is circular to use reward
to explain behavior. Although the concept of reward may provide
beautifully self-consistent descriptions of behavior in terms of
optimizing expected reward; e.g., [20], reward-based accounts (and
their neurophysiologic correlates) cannot explain behavior At no point
in the formulation above do we refer to reward or value; the only
optimization was to minimize surprise about expected outcomes. In the
context of hierarchical inference, the potentially potent role of
dopamine is obvious. This is because the delicate mixing of bottom-up
sensory information, with top-down priors, to produce conditional
beliefs (and action) is exquisitely sensitive to the precision or
certainty ascribed to representations at different levels of a
hierarchy. This is a generic and ubiquitous aspect of hierarchical
inference; for example, inference about treatment effects in group
studies rests on veridical estimates of within-subject, relative to
between-subject variability (precision). The idea here is that
dopamine reports the precision (variability) in hierarchical models
used by the brain to infer the causes of sensory data. In this view,
the task instructions and cues provided to subjects in decision-making
experiments do not, in themselves, constitute rewards but are used to
instill prior beliefs about how they should behave.Although we have
questioned the epistemological status of reward on the grounds of
circularity, one cannot deny that certain cues are inherently
rewarding; for example, those induced by appetitive stimuli. In this
sense, one might associate reward with the affordance of (hidden)
causes in the environment that elicit obligatory volitional and
autonomic responses. In this context, the tautology of reward is
resolved by noting that reward is a perceptual attribute of a cue not
a cause of behavior: in active inference, behavior is caused by prior
beliefs and ensuing exchange with environment. These beliefs ensure
certain states are occupied frequently, where these states are, by
definition, valuable. In this view, value and reward are consequences
not causes of behavior. Behavior is caused by the environment and
prior beliefs that are established epigenetically or through
experience dependent learning. This means that reward is a perceptual
(hedonic) consequence of behavior, not a cause.The argument in this
paper is that the information (prediction error) conveyed by rewarding
cues cannot be encoded by dopamine, because dopamine cannot excite
postsynaptic the responses that would be needed to mediate the
influence of that information: Dopamine can only modulate the
postsynaptic responses to glutamatergic or other neurotransmitter
release. This is not to say that rewarding cues will not excite
dopamine cells. Indeed, this is the hypothesis put forward here –
namely that rewards or cues with particular affordance can select
exteroceptive, interoceptive and proprioceptive processing channels
that mediate behavioral responses. In short, dopamine may report the
precision or confidence about reward, not reward [130], [131]. This is
the opposite behavior to that predicted by the reward prediction error
hypothesis, but follows naturally from the precision encoding
framework, since both aversive and appetitive cues signal predictable
sensorimotor sequelae. The precision hypothesis also accounts for the
finding that dopaminergic neurons fire in response to stimuli that
predict the subsequent availability of predictive information about
upcoming reward, even though such stimuli convey no information about
the reward itself [132]. On the account presented in this paper, such
stimuli elicit dopaminergic activity because they signal the onset of
a predictable sequence of events. Accounting for all observed patterns
of dopaminergic activity falls outside the scope of this paper, but it
is clear that the precision hypothesis predicts the involvement of
dopamine in a broader range of processes than some existing
accounts.The simulations in this paper focused on the depletion of
dopamine. However, increasing levels of, or sensitivity to, dopamine
in the basal ganglia has been implicated in several movement
disorders, including tardive dyskinesia [133], Huntington's disease
[134], Tourette syndrome [135], hemiballismus [136] and levodopa-
induced dyskinesia [137]. These disorders produce involuntary, non-
purposeful movements that are nonetheless more structured than simple
myoclonic jerks or tremor. If dopaminergic transmission was increased
pathologically in lower levels of the hierarchy, fluctuations in
ascending (afferent) prediction errors could become sufficiently
precise (potent) to trigger movement; in other words, subliminal cues
would be awarded aberrant affordance and elicit inappropriate
action.Although we have not dealt with the phasic release of dopamine
and the implicit optimization of precision, the current formulation
does make some strong predictions about the modulation of stimulus
bound or event related responses. If tonic dopaminergic levels
modulate postsynaptic gain, one would expect to see amplified
responses in the post synaptic targets of dopamine projections that
report (sensory) prediction errors. This means that one might expect
greater evoked responses to the same stimuli when presented in a
predictable, as opposed to an unpredictable context. Indeed, this is
the basis of an explanation for the mismatch negativity: an increase
in the event related potential elicited by a novel or oddball
stimulus, presented in a predictable train of stimuli. The proposed
mechanism rests on prediction errors that are afforded too much
precision [138].The central role of precision-weighted prediction
errors also emerges from other computational perspectives. For
example, one can formulate dynamic inference about the causes of
sensory cues without reference to neurobiology but as a generic
hierarchical Bayesian model [120]. Variational Bayesian methods then
yield the same sort of precision-weighted prediction errors as in the
present work. Crucially, the variational update equations are formally
related to reinforcement learning rules; where precisions play the
role of learning rates. This means that one could test whether
dopaminergic drug manipulations affect estimates of precision
(learning rates) based on empirical behavioral responses during
classical reinforcement learning paradigms.We have not touched upon
learning [132]. Formally, this is closely related to the use of state-
dependent precision to understand attentional gain in perception
[30].One interesting aspect of the simulations in this paper is that
they lend themselves nicely to higher-order (operant) learning
paradigms: The behavior generated by high-level sensorimotor
constructs does not distinguish between sensations caused by motor
acts or