If perception corresponds to hypothesis testing (Gregory 1980), then
visual searches could correspond to experiments that generate sensory
data. In this paper, we explore the idea that saccadic eye movements
are optimal experiments, in which data are gathered to test hypotheses
or beliefs about how those data are caused. This provides a plausible
model of visual search that can be motivated from the basic principles
of self-organised behaviour—namely the imperative to minimise the
entropy of hidden states of the world and their sensory consequences.
This imperative is met if agents sample hidden states of the world
efficiently. This efficient sampling of salient information can be
derived in a fairly straightforward way, using information theory and
approximate Bayesian inference. Simulations of the resulting active
inference scheme reproduce sequential eye movements that are
reminiscent of empirically observed saccades and provide some
counterintuitive insights into the way that sensory evidence is
accumulated or assimilated into beliefs about the world.We start with
the assumption that biological systems minimise the dispersion or
entropy of states in their external milieu—to ensure a sustainable and
allostatic exchange with their environment (Ashby 1947). Clearly,
these states are hidden and cannot be measured or changed directly.
However, if agents know how their action changes sensations—for
example, if they know contracting certain muscles will necessarily
excite primary sensory afferents from stretch receptors—then they can
minimise the dispersion—or entropy—of their sensory states by
countering surprising deviations from expected values. If the
uncertainty about hidden states, given sensory states, is small, then
this minimisation of sensory entropy through action will be sufficient
to minimise the entropy of hidden states. In this setting, entropy
corresponds to average surprise or uncertainty. However, minimising
surprise through action is not as straightforward as it might seem,
because measuring surprise is almost impossible. This is where 2006)
and associates internal brain states with conditional or posterior
representations of hidden states in the world (Helmholtz 1866/1962;
Gregory 1980; Ballard et al. 1983; Dayan et al. 1995; Friston
2005).Neurobiological implementations of free energy minimisation are
known as predictive coding and have become a popular framework for
understanding message passing in the brain—see Fig. 1. In the present
context, one can regard free energy as the amplitude of prediction
errors, so that minimising free energy means optimising
predictions—encoded by internal brain states—to suppress prediction
errors. Clearly, to make predictions, the brain has to have a model,
or hypothesis, and explaining how sensory input was generated: this is
known as a Action can also minimise surprise by minimising free energy
or prediction errors. Neurobiologically, this is just saying that
biological agents have reflexes—in the sense that they automatically
minimise (proprioceptive) prediction errors. Formally, this
corresponds to equipping a predictive coding scheme with classical
reflex arcs—this is called as 2 is based upon prior beliefs about
visual and proprioceptive input that are realised by action to produce
handwriting movements. These movements are driven by reflexes that
fulfil predictions that the agent’s arm will be drawn to a succession
of points that are prescribed by a high-level attractor or central
pattern generator. Crucially, this sort of scheme lends itself not
only to explaining itinerant motor behaviour—in terms of high-level
attractors encoding prior beliefs—but also accommodates action
observation of the sort associated with the mirror neuron system
(Miall 2003; Rizzolatti and Craighero 2004).Hitherto, we have assumed
that minimising sensory surprise or prediction errors is sufficient to
minimise the entropy of the hidden states that cause sensations. As
noted above, this rests on sampling sensory information that leaves
little room for uncertainty about hidden states. However, we can relax
this assumption if agents believe that they will sample sensations
that minimise this uncertainty. In other words, one only has to
believe that hidden states will disclose themselves efficiently and
action will make these beliefs come true. This corresponds to sampling
the world to maximise the posterior confidence in predictions.
Crucially, placing prior beliefs about sampling in the
perception–action cycle rests upon having a generative model that
includes the effects of selective sampling. In other words, this sort
of Bayes-optimal search calls on an internal model of how the
environment is sampled. Implicit in a model of sampling is a
representation or In summary, an imperative to maximise the posterior
confidence about the causes of sensations emerges naturally from the
basic premise that self-organising biological systems—like the
brain—minimise the dispersion of their external states when immersed
in an inconstant environment. This imperative—expressed in terms of
prior beliefs how the world is sampled—is entirely consistent with the
principle of maximum information transfer and formulations of salience
in terms of Bayesian surprise (Barlow 1961; Bialek et al. 2001;
Grossberg et al. 1997; Humphreys et al. 2009; Itti and Baldi 2009;
Itti and Koch 2001; Olshausen and Field 1996; Optican and Richmond
1987). In what follows, we consider the neurobiological implementation
of this prior belief, in the setting of visual search and To
illustrate the sorts of behaviour that follow from the theoretical
arguments above, we will look at visual searches and the control of
saccadic eye movements. This treatment is based on four
assumptions:The brain minimises the free energy of sensory inputs
defined by a generative model.This model includes prior expectations
that maximise salience.The generative model used by the brain is
hierarchical, nonlinear and dynamic.Neuronal firing encodes posterior
expectations about hidden states, under this model.The first
assumption is the free energy principle, which leads to active
inference in the embodied context of action. The second assumption
follows from need to minimise uncertainty about hidden states in the
world. The third assumption is motivated easily by noting that the
world is dynamic and nonlinear and that hierarchical causal structure
emerges inevitably from a separation of temporal scales (Ginzburg and
Landau 1950; Haken 1983). Finally, the fourth assumption is the
Laplace assumption that—in terms of neural codes—leads to the
2009).Given these assumptions, one can simulate many neuronal
processes by specifying a particular generative model. The resulting
perception and action are specified completely by the above
assumptions and can be implemented in a biologically plausible way; as
described in many previous applications—see Table 1. In brief, the
simulations in Table 1 use differential equations that minimise the
free energy of sensory input using a generalised descent—see Fig. 1
and (Friston et al. 2010).Table 1Processes and paradigms that have
been modelled using the active inference scheme in Eq. 1DomainProcess
or paradigmPerceptionPerceptual categorisation (bird songs) (Friston
and Kiebel 2009a, b)Novelty and omission-related responses (Friston
and Kiebel 2009a, b)Perceptual inference (speech) (Kiebel et al.
2009)Sensory learningPerceptual learning (mismatch negativity)
(Friston and Kiebel 2009a, b)Attention motor controlAttention and the
Posner paradigm (Feldman and Friston 2010)Attention and biased
competition (Feldman and Friston 2010)Retinal stabilization and
oculomotor reflexes (Friston et al. 2010)Saccadic eye movements and
cued reaching (Friston et al. 2010)Motor trajectories and place cells
(Friston et al. 2011)Sensorimotor integrationBayes-optimal
sensorimotor integration (Friston et al. 2010)BehaviourHeuristics and
dynamical systems theory (Friston and Ao 2011)Goal-directed behaviour
(Friston et al. 2009)Action observationAction observation and mirror
neurons (Friston et al. 2011)These coupled differential equations
describe perception and action, respectively, and say that internal
brain states—posterior expectations about hidden states—and action
change in the direction that reduces free energy. The first is known
as (generalised) predictive coding and has the same form as Bayesian
(Kalman-Bucy) filters used in time series analysis; see also (Rao and
Ballard 1999). The first term in Eq. (1) is a prediction based upon a
time derivative operator. The second term—usually expressed as a
mixture of prediction errors—ensures the changes in posterior
expectations are Bayes-optimal predictions about hidden states of the
world. The second differential equation says that action also
minimises free energy—noting that free energy depends on action
through sensory states. The differential equations in (1) are coupled
because sensory input depends upon action, which depends upon
perception through the posterior expectations. This circular
dependency leads to a sampling of sensory input that is both predicted
and predictable, thereby minimising free energy and surprise. To
perform neuronal simulations it is only necessary to integrate or
solve Eq. (1) to simulate the neuronal dynamics that encode posterior
expectations and ensuing action. Figure 3 presents a simulation of
saccadic eye movements, using prior expectations that lead to salient
sampling. This is similar to the handwriting example in Fig. 2;
however, eye movements are attracted not to points encoded by a
central pattern generator but to locations that have the greatest
salience. Here, salience is a function of location in visual space and
reports the posterior confidence in current beliefs about the cause of
sensory input that would be afforded by fictive sampling from that
location.The ensuing active inference can be regarded as a formal
example of 2011)—sometimes described in enactivist terms as 2001) and
illustrates a number of key points. First, it discloses the nature of
evidence accumulation in selecting a hypothesis or percept the best
explains sensory data. Figure 3 shows that this proceeds over two
timescales—within and between saccades. Within-saccade accumulation is
evident even during the initial fixation, with further stepwise
decreases in uncertainty as salient information is sampled. The
within-saccade accumulation is formally related to evidence
accumulation as described in models of perceptual discrimination (Gold
and Shadlen 2003; Churchland et al. 2011). The transient changes in
posterior expectations, shortly after each saccade, reflect the fact
that new data are being generated as the eye sweeps towards its new
target location. It is important to note that the agent is not just
predicting visual input, but also how input changes with eye
movements—this induces an increase in posterior uncertainty during the
fast phase of the saccade. However, due to the veracity of the
posterior beliefs, the posterior confidence shrinks again when the
saccade reaches its target location. This shrinkage is usually to a
smaller level than in the preceding saccade.This illustrates the
second key point, namely the circular causality that lies behind
perception. Put simply, the only hypothesis that can endure over
successive saccades is the one that correctly predicts the salient
features that are sampled. This sampling depends upon action or an
embodied inference that speaks directly to the notion of active vision
and visual palpation (O’Regan and Noë 2001; Wurtz et al. 2011). This
means that the hypothesis prescribes its own verification and can only
survive if it is a correct representation of the world. If its salient
features are not discovered, it will be discarded in favour of a
better hypothesis. This provides a nice perspective on perception as
hypothesis testing, where the emphasis is on the selective processes
that underlie sequential testing. This is particularly pertinent when
hypotheses can make predictions that are more extensive than the data
that can be sampled at any one time.These simulations suggest that we
can understand exploration of the sensorium in terms of optimality
principles based on straightforward ergodic or allostatic principles.
In other words, to maintain the constancy of our external milieu, it
is sufficient to expose ourselves to predicted and predictable
stimuli. Being able to predict what is currently seen also enables us
to predict fictive sensations that we could experience from another
viewpoint. Information theory suggests that the best viewpoint is the
one that confirms our predictions with the greatest precision or
certainty. In short, action fulfils our predictions, while we predict
the consequences of our actions will maximise confidence in those
predictions. This provides a principled way in which to explore and
sample the world—for example, with visual searches using saccadic eye
movements. These theoretical considerations are remarkably consistent
with a number of compelling heuristics; most notably, the Infomax
principle or the principle of minimum redundancy and recent
formulations of salience in terms of Bayesian surprise.In summary, we
have tried to formalise the intuitive notion that our interactions
with the world are akin to sensory experiments, by which we confirm
our hypotheses about its causal structure in an optimal and efficient
fashion. This mandates prior beliefs that the deployment of sensory
epithelia and our physical relationship to the world will disclose its
secrets—beliefs that are fulfilled by action. The resulting active or
embodied inference means that not only can we regard perception as
hypotheses, but we could regard action as performing experiments that
confirm or disconfirm those hypotheses.