This scientific commentary refers to ‘On the nature of seizure
dynamics’, by Jirsa 10.1093/brain/awu133).In this issue of Jirsa ).
They derive a formal taxonomy of seizure activity from the basic
principles of coupled dynamical systems. In brief, they show that a
minimal model—comprising just five states or variables—is sufficient
to describe the onset, time-course and offset of seizure activity.
This may sound implausible; however, the repertoire of dynamics that
coupled systems can generate may be much smaller than people imagine.
In effect, Jirsa Without recourse to Wikipedia, I confess that I could
not explain the difference between a saddle node and homoclinic
bifurcation. However, this is not important: the authors have done all
the mathematical heavy lifting for us and bring three things to the
table: first, the notion that seizure onset (and offset) can be cast
in terms of bifurcations (qualitative changes in dynamics) that are
induced by changing the parameters of a coupled dynamical system—such
as synaptic efficacy in neuronal microcircuits. Second, the attending
qualitative changes rest upon a separation of temporal scales. For
example, slow fluctuations in synaptic efficacy induce qualitative
changes in fast dynamics. Finally, there is an inherent circular
causality in epileptogenesis; whereby slow fluctuations in synaptic
efficacy cause changes in fast neuronal activity—that couple back to
the slow variables through processes such as activity-dependent
plasticity. This circular causality is a necessary aspect of coupling
variables that fluctuate over separable timescales. It is interesting
to note that these fundaments of dynamical systems are formally
articulated in synergetics—an approach to self-organization pioneered
by the first author’s mentor Herman Haken (Haken, 1983). In short,
what is on offer here is a canonical description of seizure activity
that has all the necessary ingredients for a formal taxonomy of
seizure dynamics. But how does a mathematical taxonomy reach beyond
phenomenology?At this point, we have to consider why the modelling of
seizure dynamics is potentially important. In previous years, there
have been substantial advances in the use of models of neuronal
microcircuits as forward or generative models of observed
electrophysiological responses. This is most evident in the advent of
dynamic causal modelling, which is now used routinely to address
questions about functional brain architectures—and their synaptic
underpinnings—in cognitive and systems neuroscience. The key thing
here is that dynamic causal models are not just used to reproduce the
phenomenology of electrophysiological measurements: they explain
empirical data through Bayesian model inversion and subsequent
selection. A formal understanding of how seizure dynamics are
generated could therefore provide vital constraints on dynamic causal
models of seizure activity. In principle, this means that one could
identify the biophysical substrates of slow and fast variables in
phenomenological models.The generative mechanisms underlying seizure
activity have been modelled extensively; particularly in neocortical
and hippocampal systems. A recurring theme in these studies is the
interaction between excitatory pyramidal cells and inhibitory
interneurons. This speaks to the central role of intrinsic
connectivity in maintaining excitation-inhibition balance. The
intracellular and extracellular mechanisms underlying slow changes in
synaptic efficacy have been the subject of much study. For example,
Wendling  model seizure onset in terms of slow ensemble dynamics
involving pyramidal cells and local interneurons, highlighting the
increases in excitability and decreases in slow dendritic and fast
synaptic inhibition that peak at seizure onset. The emerging picture
from these studies points to slow changes in the excitability of
cortical and subcortical microcircuits mediated by interactions
between pyramidal cells and inhibitory interneurons. Slow
fluctuations—and associated extracellular increases in potassium and
decreases in calcium ion concentration—cause, and are caused by, the
fast fluctuations in synaptic activity that announce seizure onset.
Indeed, Nevado-Holgado  have characterized the evolution of seizure
activity as a path through the parameter space of a neural mass model,
whereas Hocepied  consider a similar formulation for seizure
detection. But how can we test these hypotheses—or indeed quantify
synaptic variables in a given patient at a given point in time? Here,
we turn to dynamic causal modelling.Dynamic causal modelling (DCM) is
a biophysically informed framework for comparing hypotheses or network
models of (neurophysiological) time series. It is an established
procedure in the analysis of functional magnetic resonance time series
and is now used increasingly in electrophysiology. DCM rests upon the
fact that there is a straightforward mapping between the synaptic
connectivity of neuronal circuits and their responses to exogenous or
endogenous neuronal input. In some cases, this mapping can be
remarkably direct and intuitive (see Fig. 1 for an example). There is
an extensive literature on DCM ranging from face validation studies
(David ) to construct validation in terms of multimodal measurements
and pharmacological manipulations (Moran ). Crucially, DCM is now
finding a role in understanding pathophysiology in terms of extrinsic
(long range) disconnections (Boly ) and aberrant intrinsic (local)
connectivity that may underlie pathological (beta) oscillations in
Parkinson’s disease (Marreiros ). The hope here is that DCM can be
used to quantify slow fluctuations in synaptic efficacy in
epilepsy—and perhaps to predict seizure onset. The promise for
modelling seizure dynamics is illustrated in Fig. 2. This figure shows
the spectral responses of a canonical microcircuit as a function of
intrinsic connectivity; namely, the recurrent self-inhibition of
superficial pyramidal cells. This simple manipulation leads to fast
epileptiform activity as the system approaches a (transcritical)
bifurcation—and is motivated easily by the convergent evidence
implicating fast synaptic inhibition in the context of recurrent
coupling between pyramidal cells and inhibitory interneurons (see
above). The power of DCM lies in its ability to adjudicate among
different mechanistic hypotheses using Bayesian model selection. For
example, David  analysed seizure activity elicited during electrical
stimulation. Bayesian model comparison suggested that seizure onset
could be modelled in terms of changes in intrinsic connectivity (as
opposed to extrinsic connectivity). Furthermore, DCM identified
fluctuations in synaptic efficacy in the ictal zone; suggesting that
the mesial temporal lobe epilepsy studied by David  could be explained
in terms of a pre-ictal increase in sensitivity to hippocampal
afferents from the temporal pole.This sort of study provides proof-of-
principle that the functional anatomy of epilepsy can be characterized
in single subjects. If Jirsa K.F. is funded by the Wellcome Trust.
Principal Research Fellowship (Ref: 088130/Z/09/Z).