Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2015, 31:1–6This review comes from a
themed issue on Brain rhythms and dynamic coordinationEdited by György
Buzsáki and Walter FreemanFor a complete overview see the Issue and
the EditorialAvailable online 30th July
2014http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2014.05.0040959-4388/© 2014 The
Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article
under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).Our review comprises
four sections: the first considers the central role of gain control in
hierarchical message passing and predictive coding; with a special
emphasis on precision, attention and sensory attenuation. The second
treats oscillations and local field potentials as fingerprints that
reveal asymmetries in forward and backward extrinsic connections in
cortical hierarchies. This is a prescient area of research, because it
has the potential to disclose the hierarchical connectome and the
putative predictive coding it supports. The third section looks more
closely at horizontal connections in visual cortex and how local field
potentials have been used to characterise context-sensitive changes in
lateral interactions—in terms of effective connectivity and its
underlying (GABAergic) synaptic gain control. Finally, we consider an
example of coupling between cortical and subcortical systems that
speaks to the use of oscillations in characterising pathophysiology.
Specifically, we look at pathological beta oscillations and their
dynamic causal modelling in Parkinson's disease.Our treatment of
oscillations rests on the premise that dynamic coordination can be
understood in terms of predictive coding [1–3]. Predictive coding
supposes that the brain is a statistical organ, generating predictions
or hypotheses about the state of the world—predictions that are tested
against sensory evidence. This (Bayesian brain) perspective is
potentially important because many neuropsychiatric syndromes (ranging
from autism to psychosis) can be cast in terms of false inference
about states of the world (or the body) that may be due to aberrant
neuromodulation or gain control at the synaptic level [4,5].The
circumstantial evidence for predictive coding is substantial—both in
terms of the anatomy of extrinsic (between-areas) and intrinsic
(within-area) connections and the physiology of synaptic interactions
[3]. In these schemes, top-down predictions are used to form
prediction errors at each level of cortical and subcortical
hierarchies. The prediction errors are then returned to the level
above to update predictions in a Bayesian sense. In brief, the
prediction errors report the ‘newsworthy’ information from a lower
hierarchical level that was not predicted by the higher level. A
crucial aspect of this message passing is the selection of ascending
information by adjusting the ‘volume’ or gain of prediction errors
that compete for influence over higher levels of processing.
Functionally, this gain corresponds to the expected 6].
Physiologically, precision corresponds to the postsynaptic gain or
sensitivity of cells reporting prediction errors (currently thought to
be large principal cells that send extrinsic efferents of a forward
type, such as superficial pyramidal cells in cortex). This is
important because the synaptic gain or efficacy of coupled neuronal
populations determines the form of their spectral (oscillatory)
behaviour. See Figure 1. Because, synchronous activity determines
synaptic gain [7], oscillations have a mechanistic impact on neuronal
processing—rather than being epiphenomenal—which completes the
circular causality between synchrony and synaptic efficacy.Casting
hierarchical neuronal processing in terms of predictive coding has
proven useful in providing formal models of behaviour and
structure–function relationships in the brain. It is now arguably the
dominant paradigm in cognitive neuroscience. Under predictive coding,
the central role of precision—mediated by classical neuromodulatory
and synchronous gain control—fits comfortably with computational and
physiological formulations of neuronal processing. Crucially,
electrophysiological studies of oscillations provide a rich source of
empirical data for estimating synaptic efficacy. In what follows, we
consider recent empirical approaches to understanding the functional
architectures of predictive coding using local field potentials and
dynamic causal models (DCM) of their spectral behaviour
[8].Physiologically, synaptic gain rests on a competition between
excitatory and inhibitory processes. This means that a detailed
characterisation of gain control should differentiate between
excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents. However, LFP
oscillations are generated by both—creating a difficult inverse
problem. DCM tries to resolve this problem with the Bayesian inversion
of physiologically plausible forward models of coupled inhibitory and
excitatory populations.This section focuses on recent trends in the
characterisation of functional integration in cortical hierarchies.
Much current work focuses on spectral asymmetries in the (functional
and effective) connectivity between descending (top-down) and
ascending (bottom-up) extrinsic (between area) projections. Bastos 9].
The emerging picture is that oscillatory coupling prescribes a
functional cortical hierarchy that closely matches the anatomical
hierarchy [10]. The function of this hierarchy is an open question,
although predictive coding models offer an intriguing explanation—in
terms of hierarchical Bayesian inference.Complementing this work,
Richter 3], which predict that top-down corticocortical connections
convey prediction signals at slower time scales (e.g. beta) compared
to bottom-up connections that convey prediction error signals at
faster time scales (e.g. gamma). Recent work supports this hypothesis,
linking fast and slow frequencies to prediction error and predictions,
respectively:Bauer and colleagues [11] have recently demonstrated that
the cumulative probability of a stimulus change (a proxy for stimulus
predictability) was tracked by attention-dependent alpha-band
oscillations, while the inverse of cumulative probability (a proxy for
surprise) was tracked by attention-dependent gamma-band oscillations.
This suggests that neuronal signalling of predictions is mediated by
alpha and prediction errors by gamma. These are exactly the sort of
spectral dissociations one would expect if lower frequencies were
involved in relaying predictions and faster frequencies in relaying
prediction error.These experimental findings are now being
incorporated into models of canonical microcircuitry [3,12] to
understand at a mechanistic level how oscillations contribute to top-
down and bottom-up processing. A key challenge for future work will be
to understand not only the functional 3,13].The preceding sections
focused on the dynamic coordination among cortical areas as indexed by
their spectral coupling. Here, we focus on cortical gain control
(implicit in the optimisation of precision) within the intrinsic
connections of the canonical cortical microcircuit. In particular, we
look at recent advances in characterising excitatory-inhibitory
balance—as mediated by horizontal connections within visual
cortex—using dynamic causal modelling and neural fields.Dynamic causal
modelling (DCM) is a biophysically informed Bayesian framework for
comparing hypotheses or network models of (neurophysiological)
timeseries. It is an established procedure in the analysis of
functional magnetic resonance timeseries [14,15] and is now used
increasingly for the characterisation of electrophysiological
measurements. There is an extensive literature on the validation of
DCM ranging from face validation studies [16] to construct validation
in terms of multimodal measurements [17], pharmacological
manipulations [8,18] and psychophysical constructs [19]; for example,
predictive coding. Predictive validity has been established in studies
of pathophysiology [20]. Generally, dynamic causal modelling uses
point sources (cf., equivalent current dipoles); however, recent
developments now allow the use of neural fields in the forward
model.Neural fields treat neuronal signalling as a continuous process
on the cortical sheet using partial differential equations [21,22]. By
combining neural fields with dynamic causal modelling, one can
quantify important aspects of cortical microcircuitry, like cortical
excitability and the spatial reach of horizontal connections that
mediate receptive field properties [23,24]. Receptive fields are not
invariant to stimulus properties—their configuration is highly
contrast-sensitive [25]. In [26], the authors showed that at higher
contrasts, the excitatory centre of receptive fields in visual cortex
(V1) had a smaller stimulus summation field, while in [27] they showed
that the balance of excitatory-inhibitory influences could be
modulated by stimulus context.Neuronal responses in visual areas are
sensitive to both stimulus contrast and top-down factors [28]. This
context-sensitivity is thought to underlie visual attention [29]. It
is also known that gamma band oscillations (30–100 Hz) in V1 are
sensitive to contrast, stimulus size and attention [30]. Furthermore,
attention increases the peak frequency of gamma oscillations [31].
This suggests an intimate link among gamma oscillations, stimulus
contrast, horizontal connections and cortical gain control.These
relationships have been examined using Bayesian model comparison of
dynamic causal models that embody competing hypotheses about how
visual contrast effects lateral interactions [32]. Using invasive
electrophysiological responses from awake-behaving monkeys several
mechanisms were compared [31]: candidate DCMs allowed for contrast-
dependent changes in the strength of recurrent local connections [6],
the strength of horizontal connections [33] or the spatial extent of
horizontal connections [27]. The ability of each model to explain
induced responses was evaluated in terms of their Bayesian model
evidence; which provides a principled way to evaluate competing
hypotheses. Bayesian model comparison suggested that increasing
contrast increases the sensitivity or gain of superficial pyramidal
cells to horizontal inputs from spiny stellate populations. This is
consistent with precision or gain control in predictive
coding—assuming that increasing contrast increases signal-to-noise.
Furthermore, they provide a mechanistic explanation for why the
receptive fields of V1 units shrink with increasing contrast.We close
with an important example of dynamic coordination in pathophysiology.
Namely, the emergence of pathological beta oscillations in Parkinson's
disease (PD) and their characterisation with intracortical and non-
invasive methods to examine the underlying directed functional
connectivity (Granger causality) and effective connectivity (dynamic
causal modelling).PD is associated with degeneration of dopaminergic
neurons in the substantia nigra. However, the mechanisms mediating
Parkinsonian symptoms are not well understood. One robust finding—in
both patients and animal models—is increased oscillations in the lower
beta band (around 18–20 Hz) in the basal ganglia (BG), particularly
the subthalamic nucleus (STN). Their amplitude correlates with
slowness and rigidity but not tremor [34]. Beta oscillations decrease
with movement and their baseline level is greatly reduced by
dopaminergic medication and Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) [35]. Recent
studies point to a causal role of beta in movement slowing;
transcranial alternating current stimulation in the beta band slows
voluntary movement in healthy subjects [36,37] and adaptive DBS
triggered by high beta power appears to be superior to constant DBS in
ameliorating Parkinsonian symptoms [38].The central role of abnormal
beta has motivated a focus on its generative mechanisms. The
reciprocally connected glutamatergic STN and GABAergic Globus Pallidus
(GP) are natural candidates for generating beta [39]. A recent
simulation study showed that oscillations emerge with realistic
connectivity based on the latest empirical findings [40]. In light of
these simulations, one might assume that beta oscillations generated
in BG reach the cortex via the thalamus and ‘jam’ it. However, studies
using simultaneous MEG and STN-LFP recordings in DBS patients suggest
that the pathophysiology is more complicated; functional connectivity
in the beta band, manifest as cortico-STN coherence, is prominent and
involves ipsilateral motor areas of the cortex [41,42]. However, the
frequency of this coherence does not match that of STN beta
oscillations; rather it is in the upper beta band (25–30 Hz).
Moreover, directed functional connectivity analyses show that the
cortex drives the STN in this frequency band [41]. Additional evidence
for dissociation between the pathological beta and cortico-STN
coherence is the fact that the coherence is only weakly affected by
dopaminergic medication and movement [43]. This cortico-STN coherence
contrasts with the dopamine-sensitive synchronisation in the lower
beta band—evident within and between basal ganglia nuclei, as was
recently shown by looking at different cell populations within one STN
[44,45] and between bilateral STN [46].Dynamic causal modelling has
the potential to reconcile these findings and reveal the architectures
that underlie pathological oscillations. Two DCM studies of beta
oscillations—one in a rat model of PD and one in patients—have been
published to date [47,48]. Both show an increase in cortical drive to
the STN, accompanied by changes in STN-GP coupling in the pathological
state. Thus DCM points to changes in synaptic gain caused by abnormal
neuromodulation as the key mechanism underlying pathological increases
in BG beta synchrony. How that synchrony impairs movement is still an
open question—and it may transpire that the mechanism involves BG
outputs to other subcortical structures, rather than disruption of
motor cortical processing.From the perspective of predictive coding,
the role of beta activity fits comfortably with the observations in
the visual system that top-down beta modulates the excitability of
evoked responses. In the motor system, beta oscillations may reflect
the precision or gain afforded by proprioceptive signals—as is evident
by their attenuation during movement. This attenuation has been linked
to sensory attenuation during self-made acts [49], suggesting a
failure of sensory attenuation in Parkinson's disease that rests on
dopaminergic modulation of beta activity [5,50].This review has
considered several perspectives on how LFP oscillations can be used to
inform computational and clinical models of neuronal coupling. We have
focused on DCM as a way of formalising hypotheses about directed
(effective) connectivity. In closing, it should be noted that—unlike
descriptive (functional) connectivity measures of statistical
dependencies—effective connectivity is only as good as the model that
defines it. Clearly, to fully harness the macroscopic dynamics of
electrophysiology, there is a long road ahead to validate current
models in terms of microscopic and intracellular processes.Nothing
declared.Papers of particular interest, published within the period of
review, have been highlighted as:• of special interest•• of
outstanding interest