1The dysconnection hypothesis (Friston and Frith, 1995, Weinberger,
1993) has been implicit from the inception of schizophrenia as a
diagnostic construct: for example, Wernicke's Ungvari, 1993) and
Bleuler's Bob and Mashour, 2011) provide complementary perspectives on
a failure of functional integration in the brain. These early
formulations highlight the distinction between an anatomical
dysconnection (sejunction hypothesis) and a functional dysconnection
(disintegration of the psyche). The dysconnection hypothesis per se is
a hypothesis about functional (synaptic) connectivity that is very
specific about the pathophysiology; namely, an aberrant modulation of
synaptic efficacy. This is potentially important because it speaks to
the molecular basis of synaptic gain control in the context of
distributed and hierarchical processing in the brain.The dysconnection
hypothesis Zhang et al., 2016). Perhaps the most important aspect of
the dysconnection hypothesis is that it disambiguates between proximal
aetiologies at the level of synaptic physiology and neurodevelopmental
failures of cell migration and morphogenesis, acknowledging that the
two levels contextualize each other. Crucially, if the dysconnection
hypothesis can be falsified this would be a great advance – enabling a
focus on alternative (e.g., epigenetic) processes (Catts et al.,
2013). Having said this, the circumstantial evidence and theoretical
support for the dysconnection hypothesis appears to be accumulating as
the years pass. In what follows, we summarize some of the key
developments.2The dysconnection hypothesis tries to establish a link
between the symptoms and signs of schizophrenia and the underlying
molecular and neuronal pathophysiology. Physiologically, it suggests
that psychosis is best understood – at a systems level – in terms of
aberrant neuromodulation of synaptic efficacy that mediates the
(context-sensitive) influence of intrinsic and extrinsic (long-range)
connectivity. It proposes that the key pathophysiology lies in the
interactions between NMDA receptor function and modulatory
neurotransmitter systems. While many (synaptic) theories of
schizophrenia postulate a central role for NMDA receptors (Braff et
al., 2001, Cull-Candy et al., 2001, Geyer et al., 2001, Javitt and
Zukin, 1991, Jentsch and Roth, 1999, Krystal et al., 1994, Olney et
al., 1989, Olney et al., 1999), the dysconnection hypothesis
highlights the influence of modulatory transmitters on NMDAR-mediated
changes in synaptic efficacy. For example, changes in NMDAR
conductivity (via phosphorylation), subunit expression and trafficking
that follow activation of dopaminergic receptors (Stephan et al.,
2009). Crucially, the dysconnection hypothesis explains how the
physiological consequences of abnormal modulation of NMDAR-mediated
plasticity (such as altered pyramidal cell gain) translate into
computational impairments at the level of neuronal circuits – and how
this leads to false inference and psychomotor poverty. It is this
attempt to close the explanatory gap between pathophysiology and
psychopathology that has seen the greatest development over the past
years. This development rests on the emergence of the Bayesian brain
and predictive coding as formal frameworks for understanding
connectivity and computational architectures in the brain:3There are
many computational perspectives that could be called upon to
characterize psychopathology. These range from neural network and
dynamical systems theory to reinforcement learning and game theory.
However, these frameworks do not address the quintessential aspect of
schizophrenia; namely, the production of false beliefs. The symptoms
and signs of schizophrenia are, almost universally, attended by
abnormal beliefs and their behavioral sequelae; for example, paranoid
ideation, delusions, hallucinations, and so on. This calls for a
theoretical framework that explains A recent paradigm shift in
cognitive neuroscience provides exactly the right sort of theory that
allows one to talk about false beliefs – and understand how these
arise from synaptic pathophysiology. Cognitive neuroscientists now
view the brain as a statistical organ that generates hypotheses or
fantasies that are tested against sensory evidence. This perspective
can be traced back to Helmholtz and the notion of unconscious
inference (Helmholtz, 1866/1962). In the past decades this approach
has been formalized to cover deep or hierarchical Bayesian inference –
about the causes of our sensations – and how these inferences induce
beliefs and behavior (Clark, 2013b, Dayan et al., 1995, Friston et
al., 2006, Hohwy, 2013, Lee and Mumford, 2003).3.1Modern formulations
of Helmholtz's ideas usually appeal to theories such as predictive
coding (Clark, 2013b, Friston, 2008, Rao and Ballard, 1999, Srinivasan
et al., 1982). Predictive coding describes how the brain processes
sensory information by optimizing explanations for its sensations: see
(Bastos et al., 2012) for a review of canonical microcircuits and
hierarchical predictive coding in perception and (Adams et al., 2013a,
Shipp et al., 2013) for corresponding treatments of the motor
system.In predictive coding, neuronal representations in higher levels
of cortical hierarchies generate predictions of representations in
lower levels. These top-down predictions are compared with
representations at the lower level to form a prediction error
(associated with the activity of superficial pyramidal cells). The
ensuing mismatch signal is passed back up the hierarchy, to update
higher representations (associated with the activity of deep pyramidal
cells). This recursive exchange of signals suppresses prediction error
at each and every level to provide a hierarchical explanation for
sensory inputs. In computational terms, neuronal activity is thought
to encode beliefs about states of the world that cause sensations
(e.g., my visual sensations are caused by a Fig. 1 tries to convey the
basic idea behind predictive coding in terms of minimizing prediction
errors.3.2Predictive coding provides a compelling (if metaphorical)
explanation for many aspects of functional anatomy and perception.
However, simply predicting the content of our sensations is only half
the story. There is something else that we have to predict; namely,
the confidence or Brown et al., 2013, Iglesias et al., 2013, Yu and
Dayan, 2005). In other words, not only do we have to infer the Clark,
2013a, Feldman and Friston, 2010, Friston, 2008).Heuristically, one
can regard the prediction errors that ascend cortical hierarchies as
broadcasting ‘newsworthy’ information that has yet to be explained by
descending predictions. However, the brain also has to select the
channels it listens to. It can do this by adjusting the volume of
competing channels. Neurophysiological, this corresponds to adjusting
the Iglesias et al., 2013) and may be mediated by neuromodulatory
mechanisms of gain control at a synaptic level (Moran et al.,
2013).Computationally, synaptic gain control therefore corresponds to
an encoding of precision, which is reflected in the excitability of
neuronal populations reporting prediction errors. This may explain why
superficial pyramidal cells (encoding prediction errors) have so many
synaptic gain control mechanisms; such as NMDA receptors and classical
neuromodulatory receptors like D1 dopamine receptors (Braver et al.,
1999, Doya, 2008, Goldman-Rakic et al., 1992, Lidow et al., 1991).
Furthermore, it places excitation-inhibition balance in a prime
position to mediate ‘precision engineered’ message passing between
hierarchical levels (Humphries et al., 2009). This contextual aspect
of predictive coding has been associated with attentional gain control
in sensory processing (Feldman and Friston, 2010, Jiang et al., 2013)
and has been discussed in terms of affordance and action selection
(Cisek, 2007, Frank et al., 2007, Friston et al., 2012). Crucially,
the delicate balance of precision over hierarchical levels has a
profound effect on veridical inference – and may hold the key for a
formal understanding of false beliefs in psychopathology (Adams et
al., 2013b). Fig. 2 illustrates schematically how neuromodulatory
mechanisms may influence hierarchical message passing in the brain.4So
why is the encoding of uncertainty or precision so important for
schizophrenia? If schizophrenia is a brain disorder – and the brain is
an organ of inference – then its psychopathology must be manifest as a
failure of prediction or inference. Analyses of false inference that
emerges under failures of predictive coding all point to one
abnormality; namely, a failure to properly the encode precision of
prediction errors (Corlett et al., 2011, Fletcher and Frith, 2009,
Powers Iii et al., 2015, Teufel et al., 2010). There is a growing
literature in this area of computational psychiatry that we will
briefly summarize. Similar arguments have also been applied in other
psychiatric conditions; particularly autism: see (Lawson et al., 2014,
Paton et al., 2012, Pellicano and Burr, 2012, Skewes et al., 2014, Van
de Cruys et al., 2014).4.1The recurring theme in schizophrenia appears
to be a Dima et al., 2012, Umbricht and Krljes, 2005, Zarchi et al.,
2013). Furthermore, it explains the peculiar resistance to illusions
that is characteristic of schizophrenia (Barch et al., 2012, Brown et
al., 2013, Butler et al., 2008, Jardri and Deneve, 2013). This
resistance can be explained in the straightforward way in terms of a
relative attenuation of prior beliefs in relation to the precision of
sensory evidence. This follows because illusions rest upon prior
expectations to induce a false (illusory) percept. Arguments along
these lines provide a nice explanation for perceptual and
psychophysical abnormalities in schizophrenia but what about soft
neurological signs? Perhaps the most consistent soft sign is a failure
of pursuit eye movements (Beedie et al., 2011). Again, when modeled
carefully using predictive coding, the characteristic failure of
predictive pursuit movements – and paradoxical improvements in the
tracking of unpredictable targets – can be reproduced by an imbalance
between the precision afforded sensory (visual) prediction errors and
prediction errors higher in the cortical hierarchy predicting target
motion (Adams et al., 2012).The above phenomenology provides a fairly
comprehensive explanation for many of the trait abnormalities in
schizophrenia (i.e., abnormal eye movements, resistance to illusions,
suppression of oddball responses etc.). This has led some to suggest
that state abnormalities reflect a compensation for overly precise
sensory prediction errors. For example, if one reduces sensory
precision it is relatively easy to simulate hallucinosis (Adams et
al., 2013b). This follows simply from the fact that ascending
prediction errors lose their influence over neuronal populations
encoding expectations at higher levels in the hierarchy. In other
words, perceptual representations are statistically sequestered from
sensory constraints (Lawrie et al., 2002). However, this form of
hallucinosis does not speak to the positive symptoms of psychosis seen
in schizophrenia. To understand the key role of sensory attenuation in
explaining delusions we have to turn from perception to action:4.2To
consider agency and action from the perspective of predictive coding,
we need to introduce Friston et al., 2011). Active inference is
effectively the same as predictive coding but includes the suppression
of prediction errors by action or movement. Put simply, there are two
ways that we can minimize prediction errors. We can either change
predictions (i.e., perception) or we can resample the world to make
sensations conform to our predictions (i.e., action). This is nothing
more than a description of the motor reflex arc – in which muscles
respond reflexively to fulfill top-down predictions of an expected
proprioceptive and somatosensory state. However, to engage movement,
we have to ignore sensory evidence that suggests we are not moving.
This is where the attenuation of sensory precision becomes necessary
for action. It is almost self-evident that a failure to attenuate
sensory precision will preclude movement – because any prior
expectations about moving will be immediately quenched by precise
prediction errors correctly reporting the absence of movement.A
corollary of this failure would be a psychomotor poverty not
dissimilar to that seen in Parkinson's disease (c.f., bradykinesia and
catatonia). This provides a straightforward explanation for some trait
abnormalities in schizophrenia; both in terms of psychomotor poverty
and in terms of psychophysics. Psychophysically, the attenuation of
sensory precision is known as Brown et al., 2013, Frith et al., 2000).
A failure of sensory attenuation is nicely illustrated in the force
matching illusion – to which schizophrenic patients are
characteristically resistant (Oestreich et al., 2015, Shergill et al.,
2005). We can now ask the same question above: what would compensatory
increases in the precision of high-level (prior) beliefs look like in
a state of psychosis? The answer furnishes a plausible explanation for
delusions: to override (unattenuated) sensory prediction errors, it is
necessary to increase the precision or confidence in high-level
beliefs so that they are more resistant to sensory evidence. The
resulting false inference is particularly interesting in the setting
of action because there are only two explanations for action: either
it was generated internally or by some outside agency. This means that
the only explanation for a precise belief about an internally (self)
generated act – in the face of precise evidence to the contrary – is
that an external agency is preventing that act (or acting
antagonistically). Indeed, this is exactly the sort of false
expectation (paranoid delusion) that emerges in predictive coding
simulations of the force matching illusion, under a failure of sensory
attenuation (Brown et al., 2013).A key insight afforded by this
(active inference) account of false inference in schizophrenia is that
similar mechanisms underlie hallucinations and delusions: namely, a
compensatory increase in the precision of prior (high-level) beliefs,
relative to the (unattenuated) precision of (low-level) sensory
evidence. This suggests that Computational studies of hallucinations
and delusions are still in their infancy; however, they already speak
to some fundaments of false inference. Key among these is the relative
precision at different levels of the cortical hierarchy. At present,
consensus suggests that delusions are associated with unduly precise
prior beliefs deep within the hierarchy, leading to recalcitrant
explanations for – and attention to – sensory evidence. See (Notredame
et al., 2014) for a review of stronger top-down effects in the context
of illusions. Furthermore there is an association between top-down
effects on perceptual inference and symptom severity, suggesting that
“early psychosis and psychosis proneness both entail a basic shift in
visual information processing, favoring prior knowledge over incoming
sensory evidence” (Teufel et al., 2015).In summary, to explain false
inference in schizophrenia (e.g., delusions and hallucinations), we
are drawn to modern versions of Helmholtz's formulation of perception
as (unconscious) inference. When deconstructed in terms of neuronally
plausible process theories – such as predictive coding – we arrive at
the same conclusion that underlies the dysconnection hypothesis;
namely, an aberrant modulation of synaptic gain. This convergence
equips the dysconnection hypothesis with a formal state theory
(hierarchical Bayesian inference) and a process theory (aberrant
precision or gain control in predictive coding). The ensuing false
inference is explained not in terms of an inability to predict sensory
content but a failure to encode the relative confidence that should be
placed in sensory evidence, relative to prior beliefs. This can
produce a pernicious form of false inference that has been considered
at a number of levels; from the genesis of delusions and
hallucinations (Corlett et al., 2011, Fletcher and Frith, 2009, Powers
Iii et al., 2015, Teufel et al., 2010) through to detailed simulations
of hallucinosis, soft neurological signs and characteristic
neurophysiological deficits in schizophrenia (Adams et al., 2013b). We
now consider the implications for pathophysiology of
schizophrenia.4.3Having a process theory is important because it
provides mechanistic predictions that can be tested empirically.
Furthermore, it grounds physiological (synaptic) theories of
schizophrenia in a functional framework; thereby linking
pathophysiological explanations to functional deficits and the
patient's beliefs and experiences. Dysfunctional integration at the
synaptic level fits comfortably with earlier theories framed in terms
of signal-to-noise (Braver et al., 1999, Cohen and Servan-Schreiber,
1992, Winterer and Weinberger, 2004). Furthermore, this putative
abnormality is consistent with nearly every synaptic or physiological
theory of schizophrenia; ranging from dopaminergic and NMDA receptor
dysfunction (Laruelle, 2014, Lisman et al., 2008), GABAergic
abnormalities (Gonzalez-Burgos and Lewis, 2012, Lisman, 2012) and a
loss of excitation-inhibition balance (Jardri and Denève, 2013). The
common theme here is a failure to contextualize the gain of principal
or pyramidal cells. This means that any pathophysiology whose
downstream effects compromise the modulation of synaptic gain
constitutes an ontological class with a common functional expression –
a loss of precise inference and subsequent false beliefs about the
world (or indeed the self). A focus on synaptic gain control also
speaks to the interaction among distinct neuromodulatory mechanisms.
An important example here is the interaction between neuromodulation
and neuronal oscillations:One of the most potent physiological
mechanisms for synaptic gain rests on synchronous interactions,
sometimes referred to as Chawla et al., 1999). Almost invariably, this
entails interactions between principal cells and inhibitory
interneurons (Sohal et al., 2009); thereby linking neuromodulation,
abnormalities of fast (e.g., gamma) synchronization and cortical gain
control (Spencer et al., 2003, Uhlhaas and Singer, 2010). GABAergic
deficits have often implicated parvalbumin positive inhibitory
interneurons that target perisomatic regions of pyramidal cells and
mediate fast synchronous (gamma) activity. This is important because a
number of lines of evidence point to prediction errors being
communicated preferentially in the gamma range by superficial
pyramidal cells (Bastos et al., 2012).The gain control implicit in the
modulation of inhibitory interneurons underlies several theories of
attentional gain: e.g., communication through coherence (Fries et al.,
2008). Other examples here include dopaminergic deficits in
Parkinson's disease and the modulation of go and no-go pathways –
leading to a pathological slowing of neuronal dynamics: e.g., beta
activity. Similar themes can be found in schizophrenia, where D2
mediated hyperpolarization in thalamic nuclei may underlie
pathological slowing: e.g., delta activity (Belousov and van den Pol,
1997, Ferrarelli and Tononi, 2011).4.4To recap, a neurobiological
plausible implementation of perceptual inference is predictive coding
– a process theory that assigns specific roles to neuronal
populations, canonical microcircuits and hierarchical connections
(Bastos et al., 2012, Clark, 2013b). The most promising candidate for
explaining false inference in schizophrenia is the neuronal encoding
of uncertainty (Averbeck et al., 2011). Psychologically, this
corresponds to the salience or precision afforded to sensory evidence
(Joyce et al., 2013); while physiologically it is thought to be
encoded by the gain or excitability of principal (e.g., superficial
pyramidal) cells. This resonates with concepts like aberrant salience
(Kapur, 2003), while explicitly implicating modulatory
neurotransmission in pathophysiology. This line of thinking poses
several important questions: for example, how do dopamine and other
neuromodulators interact with NMDA receptors and GABAergic
interneurons to adjust postsynaptic gain – and is this the key
pathophysiological dimension which explains heterogeneity within
patients with schizophrenia (Adams et al., 2013b, Stephan et al.,
2009). Is the common pathophysiological pathway a failure to optimize
excitation-inhibition balance (i.e. gain control) – and is this
indexed by aberrations of fast synchronous neuronal activity
(Gonzalez-Burgos and Lewis, 2012)? In short, computational and
pathophysiological theories of schizophrenia converge on a singular
deficit – a failure of neuromodulatory gain control that translates
into a failure to contextualize sensory evidence. So what is the
empirical evidence for this failure?5There are many empirical lines of
enquiry we could discuss here; ranging from abnormalities in
physiological responses to predictability and precision; e.g., the
mismatch negativity (Umbricht and Krljes, 2005), to low-level synaptic
gain mechanisms in vision (e.g., surround inhibition (Barch et al.,
2012)). However, we will focus on systemic (systems-level) measures of
connectivity that currently predominate in the neuroimaging
literature. The dysconnection paradigm has seen a remarkable surge in
interest following the advent of high-resolution neuroimaging – and,
in particular, the use of resting state fMRI and EEG activity as a
biomarker of dysconnection (see Fig. 3). These studies have looked at
functional connectivity in schizophrenia at rest and underlying
responses induced by specific tasks: e.g., (Ellison-Wright and
Bullmore, 2009, Lawrie et al., 2002, Liang et al., 2006, Lynall et
al., 2010, Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2001, Pettersson-Yeo et al., 2011,
Rubinov et al., 2009). The overall picture that emerges from these
studies is summarized nicely in (Pettersson-Yeo et al.,
2011):“Anticevic et al., 2015) and (Fornito and Bullmore, 2015) for
empirical evidence for concurrent reductions and increases of
connectivity in schizophrenia).These studies concern measures of
functional connectivity (and associated graph theoretic
characterizations), where functional connectivity is defined as the
statistical dependence between remote neurophysiological measures. As
such, they only provide circumstantial evidence for dysconnection. In
other words, they are a compelling ‘smoking gun’. Definitive evidence
for systemic dysconnectivity at the synaptic level requires estimates
of effective connectivity (defined as the causal influence one neural
system over another). In fMRI, estimating effective (directed)
connectivity is difficult due to hemodynamic variability across
regions; this is usually resolved by biophysically informed state
space models like dynamic causal modelling (DCM). Dynamic causal
modelling has, in principle, the potential to drill down on very
specific synaptic processes implicated in schizophrenia. For example,
DRD2 and AKT1 polymorphisms in healthy subjects – implicated in DRD2
signalling – have a selective effect on directed prefrontal-striatal
connectivity, while the same polymorphisms alter the dose-response
effects of anti-psychotic drugs on cognition in schizophrenia (Tan et
al., 2012).In recent years, DCM studies of schizophrenia have started
to appear (Allen et al., 2010, Bastos-Leite et al., 2015, Benetti et
al., 2009, Brodersen et al., 2014, Curcic-Blake et al., 2015,
Dauvermann et al., 2013, Dima et al., 2012, Kaplan et al., 2016,
Schmidt et al., 2014). Almost invariably, these studies disclose
abnormal effective connectivity involving the prefrontal cortex. This
is consistent with the functional connectivity studies reviewed above.
Some DCM studies have looked explicitly for the synaptic correlates of
precision. For example, “in processing subsequent information
indicating reduced uncertainty of their predictions, patients engaged
relatively increased mid-brain activation, driven in part by increased
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to midbrain connectivity” (Kaplan et
al., 2016).These fMRI studies of disconnection are consistent with a
failure of top-down modulation (from prefrontal and parietal cortex)
of postsynaptic gain or precision in DCM studies of
electrophysiological data; especially studies of the mismatch
negativity and related paradigms (Dima et al., 2012, Fogelson et al.,
2014). But what about structural connectivity?The dysconnection
hypothesis suggests a failure of functional integration in distributed
but circumscribed neuronal systems that are particularly dependent
upon neuromodulatory afferents (Adams et al., 2013b); e.g., frontal
areas in receipt of (mesocorticolimbic) dopaminergic projections. This
would be manifest in terms of abnormal functional connectivity as
measured with whole brain techniques (Anticevic et al., 2015).
Although the dysconnection hypothesis does not call on a form of
sejunction hypothesis or leukodystrophy (i.e., it does not posit a
disruption of white matter fasciculi), one would not be surprised to
find abnormal functional integration producing changes in morphometry
– through changes in the composition of the neuropil (Keifer et al.,
2015) via trophic effects of NMDARs on dendritic trees and spines
(Monfils and Teskey, 2004, Sin et al., 2002) or changes in
tractography – through activity-dependent myelination (Fields, 2015).
Indeed, anatomical (e.g., cortical thickness) and structural
connectivity abnormalities are common in schizophrenia; however, these
differences evolve over time (Sun et al., 2016, van Haren et al.,
2011), highlighting the importance of (synaptic) plasticity. A meta-
analysis of tractography studies of schizophrenia concludes (Ellison-
Wright and Bullmore, 2009):“5.1In summary, the evidence for a systemic
dysfunctional integration from non-invasive studies of schizophrenia
is overwhelming. Much of this evidence is circumstantial and
predicated on measures of functional connectivity; i.e., correlations
or coherence among measures of neurophysiology. The consensus of these
findings is a functional dysconnection involving prefrontal cortex and
key subcortical (e.g., thalamic) and associative cortical (e.g.,
temporal) nodes. Recent (dynamic causal) modelling of intrinsic
(within source) and extrinsic (between source) connectivity suggests a
specific failure of intrinsic gain within the prefrontal cortex or
descending modulation of synaptic efficacy in hierarchically
subordinate structures. So what might mediate these neuromodulatory
failures?6In this section, we revisit the dysconnection hypothesis
from the perspective of genetic studies. We review the evidence that
the genetic alterations in schizophrenia have pathogenetic
implications for NMDA receptors and their interactions with
neuromodulatory transmitters. With the discovery of the DISC1
translocation in a large family with high penetrant psychosis in 1990
(St Clair et al., 1990), it was hoped that the genetic architecture of
psychosis would quickly emerge. Coarse genetic mapping techniques in
the 1990s facilitated the discovery of a number of genes associated
with schizophrenia via linkage analysis. The scope of these studies
was expanded with the completion of the HapMap project (International
HapMap, 2003), enabling the study of large cohorts of disease
singletons using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray
studies. Many large-scale genome wide association studies (GWAS) of
thousands of schizophrenia patients and controls have now been
performed, identifying many associations between genetic variants and
psychosis (Ripke et al., 2013).Despite the large number of
associations, SNPs only account for up to 23% of the variation in
liability for schizophrenia (Lee et al., 2012), with odds ratios of
only 1.1–1.25. Additionally, the biological functions of genes
uncovered by GWAS are often unknown, with some strongly associated
SNPs located in poorly characterized pseudo-genes and zinc finger
genes (O'Donovan et al., 2008). However, the largest GWAS study to
date, with 36,000 patients and 113,000 controls, recently identified
more than 100 SNPs with genome-wide significance (Schizophrenia
Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics, 2014). Notably, genes
related to NMDAR function and plasticity at glutamatergic synapses
featured prominently (see Fig. 4 and Table 1). These included genes
encoding the NR2B subunit (GRIN2A), serine racemase (SRR; which
catalyzes the production of d-serine, a co-agonist at NMDA receptors),
the GluR1 subunit of AMPA receptors (GRIA1), and various genes
encoding calcium channels critical for plasticity at glutamatergic
synapses. Further genes identified by this study implicated receptors
whose activation is known to modulate NMDAR function, including the D2
receptor (DRD2) and the metabotropic glutamate receptor 3 gene
(GRM3).Table 1Lists of genes that are associated with schizophrenia. A
list of specific citations for the table entries is available from the
authors. See also (Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric
Genomics, 2014).Table 1I. GeneII. EvidenceIII. Gene productIV. Known
FunctionsGenes reported with genome-wide significance, or showing
strong evidence for pathogenicity within
deletions/duplicationsNMDAR/GRIN2AGWASNMDA receptor subunitLynchpin of
synaptic plasticity at glutamatergic synapsesGRM3GWASMetabotropic
glutamate receptor 3 (mGluR3)May influence synaptic glutamate levels
or NMDA receptor exocytosisAMPAR/GRIA1AGWASIonotropic glutamate
receptor subunitInfluences postsynaptic glutamate
responsiveness.CACNA1CGWASCaV1.2 voltage-gated calcium channel
subunitImportant in NMDA-independent synaptic plasticity in the
hippocampusNRGNGWASNeurogranin – calmodulin-binding proteinContributes
to regulation of post-synaptic calcium levels and long-term
potentiationMIR137GWASmir137 - microRNAInterferes with transcription
of target mRNAs including CACNA1C, DPYD, CSMD1, ZNF804A and
TCF4TCF4GWASTranscription Factor 4Targets may include other important
schizophrenia related genes as well as stress/survival and
developmental pathways. Haploinsufficiency causes Pitt-Rivers
syndrome, a mental retardation
syndrome.C10orf26GWASUnknownUnknownCACNB2, CACNA1I,
CACNA1CGWASVoltage-gated calcium channel subunitUnknownZNF804AGWASZinc
Finger Protein transcription factorUnknownTSNARE1GWASEPHX2GWASEpoxide
hydrolyse 2Inhibition reverses PCP (and NMDA antagonist)-induced
changes to behavior in miceSRRGWASSerine racemaseConverts l-serine to
d-serine, a co-agonist of NMDA receptors. Mouse SRR knockouts
demonstrate NMDA hypofunctionDRD2GWASDopamine receptorsDRD2 is the
main site of antipsychotic actionSLC38A7GWASGlutamine transporterMay
be involved in glutamate recycling in the synaptic
cleftPLCH2GWASIntracellular calcium receptorInvolved in calcium
signalling during neural developmentNRXN1Deletion, rare
mutationMultiple splice variants yield neurexins – cell-cell adhesion
moleculesInvolved in the formation, stabilisation and remodelling of
both glutamatergic and glycinergic synapses together with
NLGN.MEF2CGWASTranscription factorAllosteric modulator of the NMDA
receptorCNNM2GWASCyclin M2Important in renal regulation of
magnesiumVIPR2DuplicationG-protein-coupled VIPR receptorVIP known to
regulate NMDA receptor activity in the hippocampus.  Genes with weaker
evidence of linkage to schizophreniaNRG1AssociationNRG1-ErbB4
signalling pathway causes reduction of NMDA currents and long-term
plasticity via phosphorylation of NR2B
subunit.ErbB4AssociationG72Associationd-amino acid oxidase
activatorG72 activates DAOA, which in turn degrades d-serine, a potent
co-agonist at the glycine site of the NMDA receptor.DAAOAssociationd-
amino acid oxidaseDISC1Association, linkageDisrupted in
schizophrenia-1Post-synaptic density protein involved in synaptic
spine formation, NMDAR trafficking and presynaptic glutamate release.
Also stabilises serine racemase.DTNBP1Association,
linkageDysbindinPost-synaptic density protein which controls NMDAR
expression, NMDA-mediated glutamate currents and glutamate
release.COMTLinkage, deletionCatechol-Degrades dopamine and
noradrenalineCHRNA7Association, linkageAcetylcholine receptorGRM5Rare
mutationMetabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5)Physically coupled
to NMDAR at the post-synaptic density; co-activation potentiates NMDA
currentsPPEF2Rare mutationCalmodulin-binding phosphataseInfluences the
levels of mGluR5LRPB1Rare mutationLDL-like receptorCompetes for NMDA
binding site on PSD-95 structural proteinLRP1Rare mutationLDL-like
receptorCompetes for NMDA binding site on PSD-95 structural
proteinPRODHLinkage, deletion, rare mutationProline dehydrogynaseNMDA
receptor agonist at the glutamate binding siteBeyond SNPs, recent
advances in genomics have allowed new sorts of genetic variation to be
examined. Application of exome capture and sequencing has identified
rare, putatively damaging mutations in multiple genes related to NMDAR
function in multiplex families (Timms et al., 2013). In addition, trio
based study designs (two healthy parents and a mentally ill child)
have revealed that schizophrenic patients carry a higher burden of
non-synonymous and deleterious de novo SNPs (variants that result from
a new mutational event and are unique to the child) than normal
controls (Girard et al., 2011, Xu et al., 2011), some of which have
been replicated in unrelated patients (Xu et al., 2012). The
importance of de novo mutations also fits with the observation that
children of older fathers have a two-fold increase in risk for
schizophrenia (Kong et al., 2012). Patients with schizophrenia carry a
higher number of these de novo mutations than controls (Fromer et al.,
2014, Kenny et al., 2014).Copy number variants (CNVs) have also been
investigated in psychosis. For example 25–30% of adult patients with
22q11.2 deletion syndrome (DiGeorge Syndrome), a deletion which
includes the Gothelf et al., 2014) – suffer from schizophrenia (Murphy
et al., 1999), making this one of the highest-penetrance genetic
changes involved in schizophrenia to date. Other CNVs have also been
identified which are significantly associated with schizophrenia
(Kirov et al., 2014). Again, a number of duplications and deletions of
NMDA-related genes have been discovered to be strongly associated with
schizophrenia: e.g., (Rujescu et al., 2009).These findings have
refined our understanding of the genetic architecture of schizophrenia
(Fig. 4). Moving beyond the simplistic common-variant-common-disease
and rare-variant-common-disease models considered previously, it is
now clear that disease susceptibility is most likely due to the
interaction of multiple genetic changes – of which a notable subset
relates to NMDAR function and its interaction with dopamine. Common
variation with low penetrance along with environmental factors may be
sufficient to trigger schizophrenia in some patients. Rare high
penetrance variants will contribute to the pathology in some patients,
possibly leading to severe, early-onset disease (Ahn et al., 2014). In
short, the high heritability of schizophrenia is probably caused by
alleles that individually are neither necessary nor sufficient to
cause disease.6.1Recent advances in the genetics of schizophrenia
suggest a central role of the NMDA receptor and its interactions with
modulatory transmitters in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Fig. 4
highlights genes implicated in the modulation of synaptic efficacy
that have been associated with schizophrenia. These genes relate to
the NMDAR and its interactions with neuromodulatory systems that are,
in turn, under control of afferent projections from cortex with NMDAR-
dependent plasticity (Bonci and Malenka, 1999); e.g., prefrontal
connections targeting midbrain dopamine neurons (Sesack and Carr,
2002).In terms of the dysconnection hypothesis, the genetic evidence
points away from Wernicke's sejunction hypothesis and towards a
primary synaptic abnormality: although white matter pathway disruption
is an important anatomical finding in schizophrenia, the evidence
suggests that developmental failures of axon guidance are unlikely to
be the primary aetiology. NMDAR hypofunction disrupts the formation of
dendritic spines and growth of dendritic trees (Monfils and Teskey,
2004, Sin et al., 2002), as well as the myelination of axons
(Lundgaard et al., 2013). This means that white matter changes can be
explained as a consequence of aberrant modulation of synaptic
plasticity via NMDA receptors, but not vice versa. This conclusion
speaks to the exciting prospect of neurogenetic connectivity studies.
Proof of principle is already at hand in, for example, effective
connectivity studies of allelic variation in bipolar disorder. “During
perception of fearful faces, the presence of the Radua et al., 2013).
Again, we see a selective failure of descending connectivity from the
prefrontal cortex.7Neuroimaging correlates of dysconnection have been
shown to be stable over time, heritable and can differentiate between
patients and controls (Khadka et al., 2013). These systemic measures
of dysconnection may therefore serve as neurobiological indices for
defining subgroups of schizophrenic patients. For example, (Brodersen
et al., 2014) identified, in an unsupervised way, three distinct
subgroups of schizophrenic patients from estimates of prefrontal-
parietal-visual connectivity using DCM and a working memory task.
Although the search for gold-standard measures of effective
connectivity is on-going, there are several well validated phenotypes
that depend on intact NMDAR function and neuromodulation. For example,
patients with schizophrenia show significantly reduced amplitudes of
the mismatch negativity (Umbricht and Krljes, 2005), which can be
explained by reduced intrinsic and extrinsic connectivity in the
auditory system (Dima et al., 2012, Garrido et al., 2007).
Importantly, the MMN is sensitive to manipulations of NMDA and
cholinergic receptors (Garrido et al., 2009, Gil-da-Costa et al.,
2013). Furthermore, the MMN abnormalities seen in schizophrenia might
be attributable to changes in NMDAR-dependent plasticity of forward
connections in the auditory system (Schmidt et al., 2013).
Interestingly, recent applications of DCM to electrophysiological data
suggest that “differential intrinsic recurrent connectivity observed
during processing of predictable versus unpredictable targets was
markedly attenuated in schizophrenia patients” (Fogelson et al.,
2014). Important schizophrenia risk variants are known to influence
MMN; for example, a GRM3 variant influences its amplitude (Marenco et
al., 2006). This is potentially important, given that mGluR3 receptors
regulate NMDAR function (Trepanier et al., 2013). Furthermore,
carrying risk variants in the single remaining COMT and PRODH alleles
in 22q11 deletion syndrome reduces its amplitude (Zarchi et al.,
2013), as with deletion of a NGL1 allele in mice (Ehrlichman et al.,
2009). There may be interesting twist to the MMN story schizophrenia:
in large cohort studies the reduction in the MMN amplitude shows a
large effect size (Light et al., 2015); however, the correlation
between the MMN and symptoms is not necessarily high (Wynn et al.,
2010). This raises intriguing questions about the underlying trait
abnormalities that implicate a failure to modulate synaptic efficacy,
relative to the (possibly compensatory) state abnormalities that
produce symptoms and signs.Measures of functional connectivity have
also been found to have a genetic basis. A meta-analysis (Mothersill
et al., 2012) found that putative schizophrenia risk variants in genes
including ZNF804A, PRODH, DISC1 and PPP1R1B, reduced functional
connectivity, while the genetic changes examined had no overall effect
on structural connectivity. This is interesting given the precedence
afforded to synaptic pathology (over axonal pathology) by the
dysconnection hypothesis.7.1Perhaps the best way to conclude is to
think about how we would describe schizophrenia to a patient or
relative. On the basis of the above, one could plausibly say:•At
present, our best guess is that schizophrenia is caused by de novo or
inherited mutations of one or more genes that influence the expression
of (other genes and) proteins mediating the neuromodulation of
synaptic efficacy or postsynaptic gain in specific brain systems;
particularly prefrontal systems.•We think that this molecular
pathology arises from an abnormal response of the NMDA receptor to
specific (e.g. dopaminergic) neuromodulatory receptor activation. This
is important because the NMDA receptor mediates activity-dependent
changes in postsynaptic gain and subsequent changes in synaptic
efficacy.•The consequences of this abnormal neuromodulation can be
diverse; ranging from dendritic and cytoarchitectonic changes, through
to activity-dependent changes in myelination, which can be observed
microscopically (post-mortem) and macroscopically (using non-invasive
neuroimaging).•The physiological consequences of abnormal gain control
are also expressed in terms of a failure to modulate synchronous gain
and abnormalities in the coherence of neurophysiological measurements.
It is likely that this involves secondary abnormalities in GABAergic
neurotransmission that can be summarized as a failure to optimize
excitation-inhibition balance or cortical gain control.•The
psychological consequences of failing to modulate synaptic gain can be
understood by appreciating that the brain generates hypotheses or
beliefs that best explain sensory evidence. A crucial aspect of this
process is the encoding of precision or uncertainty that is necessary
to select the salient information that updates and contextualizes our
beliefs. This attentional selection depends on modulating synaptic
gain.•A failure of neuromodulatory mechanisms that control synaptic
efficacy or postsynaptic gain corresponds, functionally, to an
inability to augment (attend) or attenuate (ignore) the precision of
sensory evidence, relative to the precision of beliefs about the
causes of sensory cues. This can lead to false inference (e.g.,
hallucinations and delusions) that may reflect the brain's attempt to
compensate for a pernicious and fundamental attentional failure.•The
particular (prefrontal and dopaminergic) systems implicated in the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia may be particularly compromised at
later stages of neurodevelopment – or environmental factors that could
induce a circular causality (e.g., drug misuse in adolescence).•A
further consequence of false inference is compromised learning that
rests on activity-dependent associative plasticity. This means that
false inference associated with the positive symptoms of schizophrenia
may go hand-in-hand with impaired learning and associated cognitive
difficulties.Clearly, this summary is rather speculative: to close the
explanatory gap between pathophysiology at the molecular (synaptic)
level and the psychopathology experienced by patients, we still need
to identify the links between abnormal synaptic integration,
polygenetic predisposition, epigenetics, region-specific gene
expression and the implications for hierarchical inference in the
brain. Such studies are now starting to appear; e.g., (Mukai et al.,
2015, Sigurdsson et al., 2010, Tamura et al., 2016) and one might hope
that a complete picture of schizophrenia (or the schizophrenias) will
emerge over the next decade or so.Drs Friston and Brown were supported
by the Wellcome Trust (Wellcome Trust grant no 088130/Z/09/Z). Drs
Stefan and Siemerkus are supported by the University of Zurich and the
René and Susanne Braginsky Foundation.All authors contributed to the
conceptual material described in this review. All authors contributed
to the literature review and subsequent synthesis. Authors contributed
to and have approved the final manuscript.All authors declare they
have conflicts of interest.