I know little about social psychology and less about 2013, Friston,
2010; Friston, FitzGerald, Rigoli, Schwartenbeck, & Pezzulo, 2017;
Hohwy, 2016). Particular flavors of this formulation have dominated
cognitive neuroscience and aspects of philosophy for the past decade.
For example, the Bayesian brain hypothesis (Kersten, Mamassian, &
Yuille, 2004; Knill & Pouget, 2004) and predictive processing (Barrett
& Simmons, 2015; Michael & De Bruin, 2015; Rao & Ballard 1999; Seth,
2013) are now predominant paradigms in cognitive neuroscience. Active
inference generalizes this approach to provide an enactive or embodied
treatment of action and perception. This resulting treatment bears
some remarkable similarities to the ideas reviewed in Kruglanski
et al. This commentary tries to establish the formal links between In
brief, active inference explains everything we perceive and do in
terms of one imperative, namely, the minimization of variational free
energy (Friston, 2013). Variational free energy is an upper bound on
surprise, where surprise (the negative log probability of sensory
samples) corresponds to negative Bayesian log evidence. This means
that everything we infer (and do) is in the service of minimizing
surprise or maximizing the evidence for our internal or generative
models of the world. By maximizing the evidence for our models of the
world (i.e., self-evidencing), we come to infer hidden or latent
states of the world “out there” that generate our sensations. This
formulation of “perception as inference” has a long pedigree and was
arguably best articulated by Helmholtz (Helmholtz, 1878/1971):
“Objects are always imagined as being present in the field of vision
as would have to be there in order to produce the same impression on
the nervous mechanism.”Crucially, in active inference, we also have to
consider beliefs about action or behavior. These (posterior) beliefs
depend upon the degree to which a course of action will minimize
expected free energy in the future. The notion of Technically, free
energy can always be expressed as a   Based on these beliefs, we can
then form beliefs about “what to do” by choosing those actions that
minimize expected free energy. The important move here is to separate
the divergence and evidence parts of free energy and understand what
their expected values mean. It turns out that they correspond to The
mathematical form of this separation can be expressed in terms beliefs
Equation 1 provides a detailed description of these mathematical
expressions for readers familiar with Bayesian or variational
treatments. The variable γ is a constant of proportionality that will
play an important role later in terms of affective responses to
beliefs about action.Pragmatic value acquires the semantic
“motivational” because it is the expected log probability of prior
beliefs about outcomes. In other words, if we treat beliefs about the
consequences of behavior as prior preferences, then we will choose
those behaviors that lead to goals or preferred outcomes. However,
this is always in the context of reducing uncertainty (that can be
also expressed in terms of Equation A.1 in the appendix). This is the
epistemic part of expected free energy—variously known as Bayesian
surprise, information gain, the value of information, intrinsic
motivation, and so on (see Equation 1). In summary, the interaction
between motivational and epistemic value appears to underpin the
deconstruction of cognitive consistency and plays a central role in
active inference. Note that pragmatic and epistemic values are log
probabilities. This means that there is exactly the same sort of
interaction in terms of probabilities per se suggested by Kruglanski
et al. (this issue). In other words, our prior preferences
contextualize attempts to resolve uncertainty. So how can this
formalism used to understand “the affective response to new
information” and, more specifically, how does it address “people’s
reactions to awkward news” (Kruglanski et al., this issue, p. 54)?The
important thing that active inference brings to the table is the
distinction between beliefs about states of the world and beliefs
about “what I am going to do.” Expected free energy is a functional
of beliefs about states of the world and therefore determines
(posterior) beliefs about “what to do” based on motivational
(pragmatic) and epistemic value. So where does the affective bit come
in? Generally, people describe affective or hedonic attributes to the
beliefs about “what to do,” as opposed to the “states of affairs.” In
particular, a positive valence is associated with precise, confident
(low entropy) beliefs about action, and conversely, negative affect is
associated with uncertainty and confusion about what to do next (Gu,
Hof, Friston, & Fan, 2013; Seth & Friston, 2016). This distinction
between beliefs about states and beliefs about action comfortably
accommodates the key dialectics in the target article, as
follows.First, it distinguishes between 2017; Seth, 2013; Stephan
et al., 2016).The interesting thing about associating inconsistency
with uncertainty about policies to pursue is that inconsistency
becomes proportional to the free energy expected under the policies
entertained. Mathematically, this can be expressed as follows: This is
remarkable because it is exactly the conclusion offered by Kruglanski
et al. (this issue), namely, goal-sensitive or deliberative
inconsistency is not a universal construct; it is composed of
motivational and epistemic components that contextualize one another.
Often, these imperatives can be in opposition. Indeed, a ubiquitous
pattern of behavior—seen when simulating active inference—is that
epistemic imperatives predominate initially, even at the expense of
securing preferred outcomes. Only when the context has been explored
sufficiently—and its epistemic value has been exhausted—do (synthetic)
subjects exploit their epistemic foraging to pursue preferred outcomes
(Friston et al., 2015; Moulin & Souchay 2015).Note that this
construction necessarily implies that we will try to avoid bad news
because we are inherently optimistic (Sharot, 2011; Sharot, Guitart-
Masip, Korn, Chowdhury, & Dolan, 2012). This optimism is a necessary
aspect of ideal Bayesian (active) inference, in which subjects make
choices that are most likely given the sort of subject they are
(Friston et al., 2015). Because the posterior probability of a choice
rests upon prior beliefs, these prior beliefs bias everything we do.
Any epistemic foraging (i.e., information seeking) that that leads to
highly unlikely outcomes will therefore not be entertained; for
example, we do not seek medical information that leads to a course of
action that is so unlikely it is not worth contemplating, namely,
dying.Before turning to some of the implications in terms of affective
responses to good and bad information, there is one interesting
corollary that endorses the arguments in Kruglanski et al. (this
issue)—and allows us to showcase the advantages of formal treatments,
like active inference. In brief, the constant of proportionality γ
above itself has a Bayes optimal (free energy minimizing) solution
that turns out to be proportional to cognitive consistency [this can
be written mathematically as follows by substituting Equation (2) into
the update equations in Figure 1]: This is important because this
constant of proportionality behaves in a way that has all the
hallmarks of dopaminergic responses in real brains (Friston et al.,
2014). This speaks to the neuromodulatory correlates of affective
reactions to changes in cognitive consistency—and shows how formal
treatments can link concepts in social psychology to neurobiological
processes. In short, it suggests that whenever there is an increase in
epistemic or motivational value during active inference, there will be
an increase in consistency that will be reported by increases in
dopamine activity. See Figure 1 for an example of phasic dopamine
responses to epistemic and motivational value. Indeed, there is an
emerging literature on the link between dopaminergic activity, in this
setting, that may be usefully migrated to social psychology
(Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald, Mathys, Dolan, & Friston, 2015). Although
promising, this formulation of consistency—as the impact of new
information on confidence about what to do—does not explain our
responses to good and bad news (Kruglanski et al., this issue). Or
does it?On the preceding arguments, a negative effective response to
bad news would imply that new evidence induces posterior beliefs about
the state of the world that induce uncertainty about the course of
action. This seems sensible: For example, when opening a letter that
contains exam results, one would imagine that this epistemic foraging
is driven by the epistemic value (i.e., resolution of uncertainty)
about your performance and the sort of person you are. If you have
failed, under the belief that you are an overachiever, the overall
consequences can be summarized as “What on Earth am I to do now?” In
short, bad news almost invariably induces uncertainty about how to
realize goals or prior preferences, whereas good news signifies a
clear path forward, either in the short or long term. This seems to be
a plausible explanation for our affective responses to new evidence
that incorporates both the affective dimension and the interplay
between epistemic affordance and prior preferences, both in resolving
uncertainty and inducing it in terms of future prospects. There are
more nuanced arguments (that entail the opportunity to resolve
uncertainty in the future) that can be applied to the interesting
phenomena of not wanting to know the end of a book (Kruglanski et al.,
this issue) or the final score of a football match before it is
watched. See Friston, Lin, et al. (2017) for a discussion of novelty
and curiosity in this context.So is there a universal need for
cognitive consistency? In the preceding view, one would argue that
consistency is not the primary construct: It is an inevitable
consequence of forming posterior beliefs about an active engagement
with the world that has epistemic and motivational aspects. This dual-
aspect construction has the latitude to dissociate (Bayesian) surprise
from prior preference [see Equation (1)], providing an accommodating
account of pleasant and unpleasant surprises. For example, the state
of mind on opening a gift can place motivational and epistemic
imperatives in opposition. Both will reduce uncertainty and afford
Bayesian surprise (i.e., be informative); however, the outcome (i.e.,
the gift) may or may not be what you expected (i.e., preferred).
Before closing, I wanted to briefly mention other prescient points of
contact between active inference and the Kruglanski et al. (this
issue) account.It strikes me that “a reluctance to face ambiguity and
uncertainty” (Kruglanski et al., this issue, p. 51) fits comfortably
within the epistemic value of certain actions—and the overall
propensity to minimize surprise (entailed by the free energy
principle). The degree to which one person or another expresses a need
for nonspecific closure may translate into the degree to which they, a
priori, weight epistemic against pragmatic imperatives. This speaks to
characterizing phenotypic traits in terms of priors, which is a
prominent direction of research in things like computational
psychiatry (Huys, Moutoussis, & Williams, 2011; Wang & Krystal,
2014).I was also taken with the notion of 2016). This becomes
particularly interesting in relation to understanding certain
psychiatric syndromes. For example, the explanation for depression as
self-verification or self-evidencing—in the context of prior beliefs
about adverse consequences of behavior—fits perfectly with current
formulations of depression in terms of false inference (Stephan
et al., 2016). In short, “individuals with such low self-esteem (e.g.,
depressed people) search for and prefer negative feedback consistent
with their self-view” (Kruglanski et al., this issue, p. 51). This
reduces uncertainty about their engagement with the (prosocial) world.
There are clear metaphors for this in the behavioral psychology
literature, for example, learned helplessness (Hammack, Cooper, &
Lezak, 2012; Stephan et al., 2016).In closing, I refer interested
readers to Table 1 and Figure 2 for a summary of the similarity
between the paradigm in the target article and active inference. Table
1 attempts to map the concepts and terms used in cognitive consistency
theory with the corresponding constructs in active inference. The
corresponding process theories are sketched out in Figure 2 using the
same format as in Kruglanski et al. (this issue). As intimated in the
closing comments of Kruglanski et al., these theoretical formulations
will only prove themselves in terms of their predictive validity. In
this regard, there are some interesting paradigms that are emerging
from the active inference literature that could be scrutinized from
the perspective of social psychology. I have in mind here explicit
tests of choice behavior when motivational and epistemic imperatives
are set in opposition. One might even imagine the study of the
neuronal correlates of belief updating—along the lines of the
dopaminergic responses just described (Schwartenbeck, FitzGerald,
Mathys, Dolan, & Friston, 2015).Table 1.The construct validity of
cognitive consistency and constructs in active inference.