Kandel’s treatment is a book of two parts. The first deals with
innovative thinking and insights in science and art in turn of the
century Vienna. The second overviews the neurobiology of perception
and emotion, bringing the reader back to deep questions about
perspective taking and neuroaesthetics. The premise that underpins
both parts is that the brain is an inference machine, generating
hypotheses and fantasies that are tested against sensory data. Put
simply, the brain is—literally—a fantastic organ (fantastic: from
Greek Helmholtz, 1866/1962). Kandel places this story in the context
of history and art, in an illuminating and compelling way.In
summarizing the context that art provides for understanding functional
brain architectures (and vice versa) Kandel concludes ‘we now know
that one of the main reasons expressionist art appeals to us so
strongly is that we have evolved a remarkably large, social brain.
Moreover, the brain’s mirror neuron systems, theory of mind system and
biological modulators of emotions and empathy endow us with a great
capacity for understanding other people’s minds and emotions.’ The
early part of the book is concerned with the creative achievements of
people like Oskar Kokoschka [(1886–1980): see Fig. 1] and Egon Schiele
(1890–1918), whose expressionism engages unconscious inference, while
Gustav Klimt’s ‘intuitive grasp of the power of implied line, contour
and top-down processing enabled him to create some of the most subtle
and sensual works in the history of modern art. With these new
insights into the unconscious empathic, emotional and perceptual
apparatuses of the brain, the Austrian modernists were indeed
cognitive psychologists in their own right. In parallel with Sigmund
Freud (1856–1939), they knew how to enter the private theatre of
another’s mind, to understand its nature, mood and emotion, and to
convey that understanding to the viewer.’ (p. 500). The fact that art
affords insights into functional anatomy was not new to me: my first
brain imaging experiment (Lueck )—in which Semir Zeki established the
colour centre in the human brain—was inspired by Piet Mondrian
(1872–1944). Mondrian articulated a fundamental truth about perceptual
inference and how it depends on causal structure in the sensorium (p.
498): ‘For there are made laws, discovered laws, but also laws–a truth
for all time. These are more or less hidden in the reality which
surrounds us and do not change. Not only science but art also, shows
us that reality, at first incomprehensible, gradually reveals itself,
by the mutual relations that are inherent in things.’ In other words,
there is causal structure in our world that the brain distils and
embodies in its inferential machinery. Modern versions of Helmholtz’s
ideas are now among the most popular explanations for message passing
in the brain—generally cast in terms of the Bayesian brain hypothesis
or predictive coding. These are not abstract or hand waving schemes;
nearly everywhere one looks, the anatomical and physiological evidence
points towards predictive coding as the organizing principle for
cortical microcircuits and hierarchical brain systems: see Bastos  for
a recent review of canonical microcircuits and predictive coding in
sensory systems, and Adams  for a related treatment of motor systems.
In these schemes, neuronal representations in higher levels of sensory
cortical hierarchies entail hypotheses that provide predictions for
lower levels. These top-down predictions are compared with
representations at the lower level to form a prediction error (usually
associated with the activity of superficial pyramidal cells). This
prediction error is then passed back up the hierarchy, to change
higher representations (usually associated with the activity of deep
pyramidal cells). These changes provide better predictions and thereby
reduce prediction error at each and every level of the
hierarchy.Predictive coding rests upon hierarchical (generative)
models of how sensory inputs are caused and instantiate Helmholtzian
inference in a Bayes optimal fashion. The intellectual pedigree of
these ideas can be traced directly from Helmholtz to Viennese
expressionism through Sigmund Freud: ‘Perhaps the most direct
influence on Freud was the thinking of Hermann von Helmholtz … one of
the most remarkable scientists of the 19th century, Helmholtz helped
bring physiology together with physics and chemistry. In his work on
visual perception, Helmholtz came to see psychology as fundamental to
an understanding of brain physiology.’ (p. 59). The implications of
Helmholtzian inference for perception, and particularly the perception
of art, are clear and deconstructed nicely in Kandel’s discussion of
‘the beholder’s share’ (Fig. 2). ‘The insight that the beholder’s
perception involves a top-down inference convinced Gombrich that there
is no ‘innocent eye’: that is, all visual perception is based on
classifying concepts and interpreting visual information. One cannot
perceive that which one cannot classify.’ (p. 204). ‘He appreciated
the role of cognitive schemata, or internal representations of the
visual world in the brain, arguing that every painting owes more to
other paintings the viewer has seen than it does to the world actually
being portrayed.’ (p. 212) Kandel further emphasizes the role of
history and culture in shaping an otherwise solipsistic mental world
of hypotheses—particularly through the writings of Alios Riegl
(1858–1905): ‘In his emphasis on the historical context in which all
art emerged and importance of the beholder’s participation for the
completion of a painting, Riegl stripped art of its pretension to
achieve a universal truth.’ (p. 104). Riegl was a member of the
Venetian School of Art History and figures prominently in Kandel’s
treatment of the beholder’s contribution: ‘Just as the artist creates
a work of art, so the viewer recreates it by responding to its
inherent ambiguity. The extent of the beholder’s contribution depends
upon the degree of ambiguity in the work of art.’ (p. 192). Ambiguity
(or perhaps its resolution) gets to the heart of perceptual inference:
there is no point—or pleasure—in making statistical inferences about
sure bets. The Kandel’s subsequent neurobiological overview of visual
perception follows the usual themes in a balanced way, carefully
nuanced to emphasize the role of generative models and mental images:
‘Influenced in part by Freud’s intuitive insights and Kris and
Gombrich’s systematic attempts, neuroscientists have begun a more
rigorous, cellular analysis of human sensory systems. Specifically,
Richard Gregory and David Marr began to analyse human perception in
terms of bottom-up Gestalt psychology and top-down hypothesis testing
and information processing. By confirming on a cellular level that our
sensory systems are creative—that they generate hypotheses about what
faces, facial expressions, hand positions and bodily movements are
important and what distinguishes biological from nonbiological
motion—these neuroscientists have taken us backstage into the private
theatre of the mind.’ (p. 303) However, to my mind, Kandel lets the
side down a little here by over-emphasizing the contributions of
(bottom-up) people like David Marr (1945–80), who cast perceptual
synthesis as the serial construction or extraction of visual
information—invoking notions of primal sketches and other heuristics
that I (perhaps deliberately) keep forgetting. From my perspective,
this bottom-up era represents an ugly hiatus in—what should have
been—a seamless progression of Helmholtz’s ideas to our current
appreciation of the brain as an inference machine (Dayan )—an organ
that continually generates predictions and hypotheses in a top-down
fashion. Although there are hints at an underlying generative model in
Marrian formulations, the quintessentially predictive architecture of
the visual hierarchy actually goes all the way down the eyes. For
example, the number of backward connections from the visual cortex to
the lateral geniculate far exceeds the number of forward connections
(Sillito and Jones, 2002). Furthermore, the notion of predictive
coding in the brain was first introduced as an explanation for retinal
processing (Srinivasan ). It did strike me that the detour from
unconscious inference (Helmholtz, 1866/1962) to conscious inference
(as considered by Kandel) was based on the seminal work of several
visual neuroscientists from the eastern seaboard of America—where
Kandel has worked since 1952.In the denouement of his book Kandel
considers some of the more challenging aspects of the inferential
brain; in particular, how we make inferences about other people,
ourselves and our emotional states. He cleverly conflates the mirror
neuron system with reflections in a mirror. This captures the essence
of ‘perspective taking’, which is unpacked in terms of second order
representations (representations of representations) as they relate to
theory of mind and how artists use reflections (Fig. 3). These high
order aspects of inference in the brain represent the frontiers of
theoretical neurobiology—frontiers that may hold the key for a
systemic understanding of several neuropsychiatric syndromes. It is
self evident that if our brains entail generative models of our world,
then much of the brain must be devoted to modelling entities that
populate our world; namely, other people. In other words, we spend
much of our time generating hypotheses and predictions about the
behaviour of people—including ourselves. As noted by Kandel ‘the brain
also needs a model of itself’ (p. 406). This places the mirror neuron
system centre stage in generating both proprioceptive and
exteroceptive predictions about how you (and I) will behave. To
appreciate fully the bilateral nature of predictions provided by the
mirror neuron system, we have to take unconscious inference to the
next level and consider it in an embodied context. Put simply, one can
regard perception as the suppression of exteroceptive prediction
errors by selecting predictions that are best able to explain
sensations. However, exactly the same argument can be applied to
action that minimizes proprioceptive prediction errors via the
classical reflex arcs. In other words, we can reduce prediction errors
in one of two ways: we can either change predictions so that they
match (exteroceptive) sensory samples, or we can change the samples
through action, to make them match (proprioceptive) predictions. This
is active inference. So what has this got to do with mirror neurons?If
mirror neurons provide top-down predictions of both the kinaesthetic
(proprioceptive) and exteroceptive consequences of moving—and thereby
cause movements through motor reflexes, then they provide a ready-made
set of hypotheses for inferring the motor intentions of other people.
This is because the exteroceptive (e.g. visual) consequences of
movements are the same and all we have to do is to suppress the
proprioceptive predictions. This provides a nice perspective on why
mirror neurons respond both to self-made acts and during action
observation (Kilner ). More generally: ‘just as the visual brain
constructs models of reality from figural primitives, so our social
brain is innately wired to function as a psychologist, forming models
of other people’s motivations, desires and thoughts.’ (p. 406)
However, there is an important twist here. To harness the mirror
neuron system during action observation, we have to suppress
proprioceptive prediction errors that would otherwise elicit movements
and cause us to mimic (mirror) the subject of our observation. This
suppression rests on (mathematically speaking) reducing the precision
of—or confidence in—proprioceptive prediction errors. This speaks to
fundamental aspect of inference in the brain; namely the encoding of
precision or confidence through neuromodulation. In other words, not
only do we have to infer the I have deliberately taken this essay
slightly beyond Kandel’s synthesis by introducing neuromodulation as
the neuronal basis of precision (the encoding or representation of
uncertainty). I do this because it ties inference in the brain to
synaptic processes that may be compromised in syndromes like
schizophrenia, Parkinson’s disease, autism, hysterical disorders, and
so on. The basic idea, which is gaining increasing traction in the
literature, is that many disorders of active inference can be
understood as a failure of neuromodulation. A recent theoretical paper
in Edwards ) provides a nice example of this: it describes how one can
understand functional (hysterical) symptoms as aberrant inference that
follows from a failure to optimize precision (dopaminergic
neuromodulation). Wherever one looks in the theoretical literature,
the same theme is emerging: from false inference as an explanation for
the positive symptoms (hallucinations and delusions) of schizophrenia
(Fletcher and Frith, 2009), to the loss of central coherence in autism
(Pellicano and Burr, 2012). Many of these formulations rest on
understanding behaviour and action as part of the (active) inferential
process that underlies Kandel’s premise. So can we explain emotion
with precision and active inference?Perhaps the most prescient
challenge to formal descriptions of the brain as an inference machine
is how one can accommodate emotions, self-awareness and disorders
thereof. There are already exciting ideas in the recent literature
that provide a simple perspective on emotional processing from an
inferential (predictive coding) perspective; e.g. Seth . The basic
idea is as follows: recall from above that a simple explanation for
motor behaviour appeals to motor reflexes that cancel proprioceptive
prediction errors. These prediction errors are formed by comparing
primary afferent input from stretch receptors with descending
proprioceptive predictions to alpha motor neurons in the spinal-cord
(and cranial nerve nuclei). This view replaces descending motor
commands with motor predictions that are fulfilled by peripheral
reflexes (Adams ). The predictions themselves are elaborated on the
basis of deep hierarchical inference about states of the world,
including the trajectories of our own bodies. Exactly the same
mechanism can be applied to interoceptive signals. This means that the
internal milieu is controlled by autonomic reflexes that transcribe
descending interoceptive predictions into a physiological
homoeostasis. As with the mirror neuron system (and sensorimotor
representations in general), these interoceptive predictions are just
one—among many—of multimodal predictions that emanate from high-level
hypotheses about our embodied state. For example, the best explanation
for the myriad of sensory inputs I was experiencing on the aeroplane
was my situated state of mind. A situated state that comprises an
internally consistent hierarchical model of the world, with multiple
levels of description; from the (alluring) visual objects that predict
the sensory impressions upon my retinal epithelia to the (oculomotor)
proprioceptive predictions producing saccadic eye movements (Fig. 4).
Crucially, these hierarchal representations also predict my
interoceptive state; including sympathetic and parasympathetic
outflow—literally, my gut feelings. In this view, interoceptive
information does not cause our self-awareness, or vice versa. There is
a circular causality in which neuronal representations cause changes
in autonomic status by enslaving autonomic reflexes. At the same time,
interoceptive signals entrain hierarchical representations so that
they provide the best prediction. Emotional valence is therefore a
necessary aspect of any representation in the brain that includes
interoceptive predictions. This means that—in terms of the brain’s
computational anatomy—the influence of gut feelings (interoceptive
signals) is inherently contextualized by concomitant exteroceptive and
proprioceptive input. As Kandel observes: ‘As with visual perception,
where we have learned that the brain is not a camera but a Homeric
storyteller, so with emotion: the brain actively interprets the world
using top-down inferences that depend upon context. As James pointed
out, feelings do not exist until the brain interprets the cause of the
body’s physiological signals and assembles an appropriate, creative
response that is consistent with our expectations and the immediate
context.’ (p. 351) Extending the active inference framework to include
autonomic reflexes and interoceptive predictions raises a whole series
of interesting questions. For example, what role do neuromodulators
like dopamine and oxytocin play in nuancing the precision of
interoceptive prediction errors? What is the relationship between
exteroception and interoception during self observation (Ainley )? Do
von Economo neurons have a privileged role in communicating top-down
interoceptive predictions from the insular cortex to the amygdala, and
hypothalamic systems (Critchley and Seth, 2012)? The theme of
hierarchal inference and circular causality is now also emerging in
the context of neuropsychoanalysis (Panksepp and Solms, 2012); can one
cast Freudian constructs in terms of conscious and unconscious
inference in a biological brain? And what roles do art and
neuroaesthetics play in disclosing mental models? Are generative
models endowed epigenetically with canonical (Platonic) forms or, as
Riegl and Gombrich would have it, engraved by culture and experience?
Are we driven to search out—or create—their sensory correlates, as
evolution’s epistemic engineers?These questions speak to the very
issues that exercised the scientists and artists that Kandel
celebrates in his scholarly and thought-provoking book. I hope this
conclusion reflects the depth of Kandel’s synthesis, his encyclopaedic
knowledge and writing style, which is (nearly) as engaging as his
iconic laughter.The author is supported by the Wellcome Trust.